--- TEMPLATE ---

--- START OF TEXT  () ---
--- END OF TEXT  ---

--- ENF OF TEMPLATE ---
--- MANUAL FOR LADD CRYPTOLECT DECIPHERMENT ---

[1. INTRODUCTION AND ORIGIN]
The texts within this Codex belong to the "Ladd Cryptolect" family, generated by the Forgotten Languages Organization using NodeSpaces V2.0 software. This is not a standard constructed language (conlang) but an "engineered language" derived from natural language evolution simulations, heavily influenced by English syntax but subjected to chaotic morphological drift, symbolic masking, and phonetic shifting.

[2. SYNTAX AND TOPOLOGY]
    Sentence Topology: Generally follows English Subject-Verb-Object (SVO).
    Stability: Function words (pronouns, prepositions, conjunctions) are relatively stable.
    Volatility: Nouns and verbs sometimes are more volatile and context-dependent.

[3. DICTIONARY OF HIGH-FREQUENCY FUNCTION WORDS]

    ladd   = of
    raedd  = in
    ifeshi = by
    ank    = which
    id     = and
    idda   = is
    s'     = the (prefix)
    y      = we
    ud     = you
    im     = my
    ed     = his
    sler   = her
    wéy    = they
    wès    = this
    yt     = that (conjunction)
    lùt    = not
    an     = do (auxiliary)
    dí     = to
    sha    = for
    raz    = at
    olu    = one
    tnu    = two
    dée    = three
    wùur   = four
    list   = most
    n      = who
    sem    = with
    fdem   = from
    gwítgadn / gwítgadàn = between
    slow   = how
    wy     = why
    wéé / deé = there
    raen = have
    dazàe = value
    ez = at
    yy = day / way
    issù / issa = as
    on = on (often unchanged, but sometimes "an")
    agwet = about
    ren = are (verb to be plural)
    sle = he
    se = she
    siud = would
    wééwùé = therefore
    gwí = be (infinitive/future base)
    yé = were
    owér = other
    ewér = rather
    
(strange terms/artifacts)
    szir = (szir is very strange case. It seems that it do not correspond to anything in english, and is actually an artifact of the simulated evolution of the ladd cryptolect language. This hypothesis is derived from text 80, where the original text had an english citation and its translation to ladd, with nothing in the english citation corresponding to szir. Maybe it means something, but by now, I don't know. When translating these, just put them inside braquets in their corresponding place.)
    reven = (Apparently means heaven (biggest proof in text 82, wich talks about the translation of the word TITOGAN from the Guanche language, wich translate to sky/heaven in english), but appears one time with a prefix (ne), and when in front of szir seems to translate to nothing.)

[4. MORPHOLOGICAL SHIFTS AND SYLLABLE MAPPING]
WARNING: Translation depends heavily on accents (à, á, è, é, ì, í, ò, ó) and position within the word.

sl = h (initial or standalone)
slà = ge / gr
slí = ce / ci / ke
slie = cra / cee / kee
slàé = gre
slò = spe
slá = ga / sa
sló = gu
slé = were / where / sme
slè = smi / hri
slo = ho / go / so
sla = fu / ha

lí = mu
lì = na
li = mo
lé = me
lè = mi
le = ma
lú = ni
lù = no
lu = ne
lo = nu
là = le
lá = la / ga

wé = the / te / de
wè = thi / ti / di
wéè = dri / deri
wí = thu / tu / du
we = da / bo
wi = do
wú = fi
wù = fo
wu = fe
wò = fa

dé = ta
dè = te
de = su / ru / ve
dèè = tri / teri
dèé = tre / tere
déè = tari
di = ti
dí = to

sú = ru
sù = sa
su = ro
sò = so / sho / se
só = si
so = sh / se

dde = ve
dda = va
da = va
dí = to
dì = tu

gwè = ca
gwí = be
gwì = bi
gwé = bu

má = po
mà = pu
ma = pi

zá = lo
zà = lu
za = li

é = re
è = ri
e = ra

jì = co
jí = ci / ki
je = vi

ta = tu / tw
tu = vo

frí = ce / ke
fre = gi / he

eiy = pla
ba = li
y = we / wa
k = qu / c / k
fa = pa / pha
nu = wo

-rim  = -rs/-rm
-at   = -ly
    
[5. TRANSLATION STRATEGY]
If a word is unknown:
    1. Search the codex and make sure it has no translation yet.
    2. Set the syllables apart and try translating them (if they are not in the manual, observe and analyze through the rest of the codex, because not every consonant is listed here in the manual).
    3. Use context: "s'slolér" implies a noun; "idda" implies a verb following. What is the topic of the text?

--- END OF MANUAL ---
--- START OF TEXT 1 (The teacher's grammar book (2) /// S'dèaksler's slàemler gruk (2)) ---

S'dèaksler's slàemler gruk slàéw out ladd my exlòèenslí dèaksling slàemler id jìmmásódion léands jìursòs dí ewígwèdion sdìwénts sónslí 1981. Yt i wèsjìddeéd earat raedd my gwèéer idda yt lárslà lomgwírs ladd lòdeslòkdidde dèakslers an lùt fel jìnwúwént agwet wéir klùwlàdslà ladd engbas slàemler. Wéy exlòèenslí aeon slírdéin wéslàée ladd anxiety issa aeon édelt. List raen éjìglúzed yt wéy sid gwí éuiéd dí dèaksl slàemler—and wéy aén't slappy agwet it. leny raen slad gand exlòèenslís sem slàemler raedd s' lóst. Wéy "wèdn't slàt it," or, sùdwér sdill, wéy "lást wèdn't baslí it." Luarat savo ren derlòèsòd yn, aeon fw gadks indí my slàemler jìursòs, wéy wèsjìdder lùt onat yt wéy ren "slàtding it" gwét yt slàemler idda akdìalat slan. s' dèaksler's slàemler gruk aims dí déslí éawérs fudd aeon sólèlár tusslislà ladd wèsjìddery.
:::
The teacher's grammar book grew out of my experience teaching grammar and composition methods courses to education students since 1981. What I discovered early in my career is that large numbers of prospective teachers do not feel confident about their knowledge of english grammar. They experience a certain degree of anxiety as a result. Most have recognized that they will be required to teach grammar—and they aren't happy about it, many have had bad experiences with grammar in the past. They "didn't get it," or, sadder still, they "just didn't like it." Nearly all are surprised when, a few weeks into my grammar courses, they discover not only that they are "getting it" but that grammar is actually fun. the teacher's grammar book aims to take readers on a similar voyage of discovery.

Yt's luw raedd s' sòjìnd ewèdion s' leny dèakslers id sdìwénts n usòd s' wúrst ewèdion ladd s' dèaksler's slàemler gruk lòdejewéd daèous degslàsdions odder s' gadars indènwéd dí leslí s' dèxt gwítdèr. I'dde dèèed dí injìrmáedè wéir degslàsdions indí s' sòjìnd ewèdion issa líksl issa mássóblà, id i slolò wéy ren slappy sem s' édelt ladd wès inwèékt jìllágyedion. raedd leny éslòkts, s' wúlúsòd lòdewíkt idda sóglúwúgwèntat wèffént fdem s' oèslelìl. s' lié immárdént kslanslàs aé...
:::
What's new in the second edition the many teachers and students who used the first edition of The teacher's grammar book provided various suggestions over the years intended to make the text better. I've tried to incorporate their suggestions into the second edition as much as possible, and I hope they are happy with the result of this indirect collaboration. in many respects, the finished product is significantly different from the original. the more important changes are...

--- END OF TEXT 1 ---
--- START OF TEXT 2 (Secret Slavonic Dialect /// Sòslíét Slátulúk Wèalàkt) ---

Wésò skslools jìmwùrdingat endeéd yt dewdy máor kslilwéén éslíidded làssòns sdèelòd raedd liebaty id jíjek jerdìe. Wéy lòdejewéd s' adwéd gwíluwút ladd slíemang wésò ruungsdèrs gwésy savo yy eddery denyy—wé onat yy yt list yé lùt raz nrk. wès aplòdeaksl jìuld lùt sòrdde odder s' záng dèrm, sloydder, id mábadijíans gwíslán expzáèng opdions. alanugsl lessùkslusòtts slad wéslíéed raedd 1647 yt vareso sòttlàlént ladd 50 wòlèbaes líst raen aeon slàemler skslool id savo sdédès slad enjìueslàd ulúddersùl ewígwèdion, lessùkslusòtts wèd lùt implàlént jìmmàlsòry ewígwèdion láws undeal 1852. list ladd s' owér sdédès sòon wùlzáyd deit, id ifeshi s' end ladd s' 19d slíndìry, aléègwè essòndialat slad lìdionanwé jìmmàlsòry ewígwèdion. less ewígwèdion làd dí aeon éjìnslípdìababadion ladd slow slàemler ys déugslt. elàléndéry skslools édéilud s' wúrst slankdion, banjíng slàemler id éawèng dí lòdejewé sdìwénts akslíss dí immárdént liel làssòns.
:::
These schools comfortingly ensured that rowdy poor children received lessons steeped in morality and civic virtue. They provided the added benefit of keeping these youngsters busy all day every Sunday—the only day that most were not at work. this approach could not serve over the long term, however, and politicians began exploring options. although massachusetts had decreed in 1647 that any settlement of 50 families must have a grammar school and all states had encouraged universal education, massachusetts did not implement compulsory education laws until 1852. most of the other states soon followed suit, and by the end of the 19th century, America essentially had nationwide compulsory education. mass education led to a reconceptualization of how grammar was taught. elementary schools retained the first function, linking grammar and reading to provide students access to important moral lessons.

--- END OF TEXT 2 ---
--- START OF TEXT 3 (Young Students /// Ruung Sdìwénts) ---

Ruung sdìwénts yé déugslt ifeshi aeon slàemledisdès, n lòdejewéd insdèsúkdion raedd s' alwògwít (slàemledé), éawèng, yèding, id slàemler. Aeon slàemledisdès alsò sládde insdèsúkdion raedd owér debslikts, deksl issa lísók id lewélediks. Yn sdìwénts yé lòdewújíent éawérs id yèdèrs, wéy yé wéeléd slàemledijìs, vaj badèedè.
:::
Young students were taught by a grammatistes, who provided instruction in the alphabet (grammata), reading, writing, and grammar. A grammatistes also gave instruction in other subjects, such as music and mathematics. When students were proficient readers and writers, they were deemed grammatikos, or literate.

Raz wès máint, wéy gwíslán sdìdarng badèedìé raedd earlust. Pládí ydedè raedd lòdedésloes yt "yn s' gyy raenid làarlud slis làtdèrs id idda gwíslenlúng dí unwérsdénd yt idda yètdèn, issa gwíwùé sle unwérsdíod onat yt ys smáslín, wéy (wé dèakslers) màt indí slis slands s' nrks ladd s' slàéat máets, anksl sle éads sótding fudd aeon gwínksl raz skslool" (ll. 325–326).
:::
At this point, they began studying literature in earnest. Plato wrote in protagoras that "when the boy has learned his letters and is beginning to understand what is written, as before he understood only what was spoken, they (the teachers) put into his hands the works of the great poets, which he reads sitting on a bench at school" (11. 325-326).

--- END OF TEXT 3 ---
--- START OF TEXT 4 (The Teacher's Grammar Book /// S' Dèaksler's Slàemler Gruk) ---

Lòéwòslí
s' dèaksler's slàemler gruk idda wésóglud sha sdìwénts n ren lòélóèng  dí gwí-jìlé engbas or lánslóaslà arts dèakslers, issa yll issa sha slíéwéndialàd dèakslers n ynt dí klùw lié agwet slàemler. list slàemler gruks wùys fudd dèrlèlùzágy. sòlé add aeon wèsyssóon ladd s' jìnlukdion gwítgadn slàemler id yèding. s' dèaksler's slàemler gruk, sloydder, idda wèffént. slírdéinat, it dèéats dèrlèlùzágy andeugslat, gwét it idda wòr lié yn lást aeon bast ladd slàemler dèrms. it idda lùt aeon slandgruk id ys ludder indènwéd dí gwí olu. 
:::
Preface
the teacher's grammar book is designed for students who are preparing to be-come english or language arts teachers, as well as for credentialed teachers who want to know more about grammar. most grammar books focus on terminology. some add a discussion of the connection between grammar and writing. the teacher's grammar book, however, is different. certainly, it treats terminology thoroughly, but it is not a handbook and was never intended to be one.

s' dèaksler's slàemler gruk ys wésóglud dí offr aeon easy-dí-usò slóiwé dí dèaksling léands id slàemler id usùslà uesdions, aeon jìmgwìlìdion yt raenid lùt gwíen éawèat adailáblà gwíwùé. raedd adwèdion, it lòdejewés aeon odderjeew ladd engbas slàemler yt idda inwùrléd lùt onat ifeshi slisdíègwèl wéddezáplénts raedd s' wúeld gwét alsò ifeshi aeon daèety ladd lòysloslegwèl, ésòarksl, id wúzásòwúgwèl isdees yt unwérbae slàemler id raedd am efwùrts dí unwérsdénd slàemler, lánslóaslà, yèding, id dèaksling. out ladd wès anwé-ensleng expzáedion elérslàs s' jeew yt aeon dèaksler's ksloislí laddslàemler éflàkts wúzásòwúgwèl id lòysloslegwèl oèendédions yt infzàenslí gyd s' jìndènt id s' léands ladd lánslóaslà arts insdèsúkdion.
:::
the teacher's grammar book was designed to offer an easy-to-use guide to teaching methods and grammar and usage questions, a combination that has not been readily available before. in addition, it provides an overview of english grammar that is informed not only by historical developments in the field but also by a variety of pedagogical, research, and philosophical issues that underlie grammar and our efforts to understand grammar, language, writing, and teaching. out of this wide-ranging exploration emerges the view that a teacher's choice of grammar reflects philosophical and pedagogical orientations that influence both the content and the methods of language arts instruction.

--- END OF TEXT 4 ---
--- START OF TEXT 5 (A Central Part /// Aeon Slíndèel Lórt) ---

S' sdìdy ladd slolér ys aeon slíndèel lórt ladd elàléndéry ewígwèdion raedd slàéeslí gwí-gwèusò slis máems jìndéin liel léssùslàs yt yé wéeléd jedél sha kslilwéén. Raedd adwèdion, s' máems élòésòndèd s' iwéal wùrm ladd lánslóaslà yt sdìwénts yé exlòkdèd dí lèlèk sò issa dí lòésòrdde s' "màèty" ladd sloléèk slàéek. Wís, slàéek ewígwèdion wéddezálòd aeon lòésslíèpdidde sdénslí sem éslòkt dí lánslóaslà id slàemler, wéwúlúng lùdions ladd "jìrékt" id "injìrékt" lánslóaslà usò raedd dèrms ladd adsleénslí dí badèery lùrms yt kslaekdèèzed slàéek slunwééds ladd gadars raedd s' lóst. Dí gwítdèr unwérsdénd s' ewígwèdiolìl wèfwúyldies assòjíadèd sem wès aplòdeaksl, y lègslt jìnsówér yt raedd am lánslóaslà arts klássòs siud gwí baslí díyy ked y usòd s' lánslóaslà ladd sùslíslòaé issa aeon liwél sha jìrékt engbas.
:::
The study of homer was a central part of elementary education in Greece because his poems contain moral messages that were deemed vital for children. in addition, the poems represented the ideal form of language that students were expected to mimic so as to preserve the "purity" of homeric greek. Thus, greek education developed a prescriptive stance with respect to language and grammar, defining notions of "correct" and "incorrect" language use in terms of adherence to literary norms that characterized greek hundreds of years in the past. To better understand the educational difficulties associated with this approach, we might consider that our language arts classes would be like today if we used the language of shakespeare as a model for correct english.

Slàéeks ladd 6d slíndìry awéns objeousat kluw yt wéir lánslóaslà ys wèffént fdem yt slolér usòd. S' lánslóaslà slad kslanslàd, issa savo bajeng lánslóaslàs an. Wès dèdeublàd s' slàéeks slàéatat, gwígwèusò wéy jeeyd s' sloléèk lòèod issa aeon slolwén aslà. Kslanslà luslíssùèat léant wékbalu.
:::
Greeks of 6th century athens obviously knew that their language was different from that what homer used. The language had changed, as all living languages do. This troubled the greeks greatly, because they viewed the homeric period as a golden age. Change necessarily meant decline.

Id alanugsl it ley sòem idelúk dí nizze gwígwèusò y slolùr s' slàéat jìndèègwédions dí jíjebabadion yt slàéeslí lewé fdem agwet 600 dí 300 bk, s' slàéeks ladd s' lòèod ofdèn sùw wémsòlddes issa bajeng raedd s' yrk aslàs afdèr aeon wòll fdem s' slolwén aslà ladd wéir làslànyry sledees.
:::
And although it may seem ironic to us because we honor the great contributions to civilization that greece made from about 600 to 300 BC, the greeks of the period often saw themselves as living in the dark ages after a fall from the golden age of their legendary heroes.

--- END OF TEXT 5 ---
--- START OF TEXT 6 (All Classes /// Savo Klássòs) ---

Ezáydion id rsledíèk raedd ládèr slàéek ewígwèdion" (p. 4). raedd earbaer dilés, ewígwèdion ys raedd s'slands ladd lóénts, sem liwérs ewígwèding wéir wegsldèrs id wòwérs ewígwèding wéir sòns. Gwét y sòe raedd s' ibaad yt ifeshi slolér's dilé (judj mássóbat líksl earbaer), sslildy wòlèbaes jìmlinat empzágadd lòdefssóolìl dìdírs.
:::
Elocution and rhetoric in later Greek education" (p. 4). in earlier times, education was in the hands of parents, with mothers educating their daughters and fathers educating their sons. But we see in The iliad that by homer's time (and possibly much earlier), wealthy families commonly employed professional tutors.

Ifeshi s'end ladd s' 6d slíndìry, ewígwèdion slad gwíjìlé sysdèledized id lié or làss ulúddersùl sha gyys, n gwíslán atdènwèng lòèdadè skslools raz s' aslà ladd 6 id jìndiloed raz làast undil s' aslà ladd 14. S' sloddernlént wèd lùt éuié atdènynslí, gwét ewígwèdion ys sligslat dazàed aling savo klássòs, id it sòems yt edden máor lóénts sòléslow wùund s' léans dí lòdejewé dìidion:
:::
By the end of the 6th century, education had become systematized and more or less universal for boys, who began attending private schools at the age of 6 and continued at least until the age of 14. The government did not require attendance, but education was highly valued among all classes, and it seems that even poor parents somehow found the means to provide tuition:

--- END OF TEXT 6 ---
--- START OF TEXT 7 (Church Slavonic /// Keslurksl Slátulúk) ---

Wès wésslíèpdion ladd s'sdèsúkdìé ladd Old Church Slavonic idda indènwéd dí lòésònt slalat s'immárdént ydé agwet s'lánslóaslà, ananut jíding savo s'minutiae ladd atdèsdèd daèant slòlbangs. S'wòkts raen gwíen dèéadèd fdem s'máint ladd jeew ladd sdèsúkdìel banslóisdiks, gwét lòysloslegwèl kláèty raenid déslín lòéslíwénslí odder s'jìnjísòluss éuiéd sha elàslánt wùrlel wésslíèpdion.
:::
This description of the structure of Old Church Slavonic is intended to present fully the important data about the language, without citing all the minutiae of attested variant spellings. The facts have been treated from the point of view of structural linguistics, but pedagogical clarity has taken precedence over the conciseness required for elegant formal description.

Old keslurksl slátulúk ys usòd odder aeon lòèod ladd sòlé tn slunwééd gadars id raedd daèous slàoslàewúgwèl lórts ladd s'slájek nrld lòéjísòat raz s'dilé yn s'slájek lánslóaslàs yé unwérsloing emad, slanyléndél, wèdderslànt kslanslàs . Sòlé ladd wésò kslanslàs ren anubtlàss éflàkdèd raedd s'daèant slòlbangs raedd s'fw dèksts anksl raen derjedded fdem wès lòèod, sò yt anlà list daèadions raedd slàemler id tugwègwéláry ren s'sòrts ladd stybasdik id iwèosynslíedik wèffénslís yt ren wùund raedd s'sdényrd vaj badèery lánslóaslà ladd merg sónglà emáksl, sòlé immárdént daèant wédéils édelt fdem wèffént ésleolìl wèalàkdél slisdíry.
:::
Old church slavonic was used over a period of some two hundred years and in various geographical parts of the slavic world, precisely at the time when the slavic languages were undergoing rapid, fundamental, divergent changes. Some of these changes are doubtless reflected in the variant spellings in the few texts which have survived from this period, so that while most variations in grammar and vocabulary are the sorts of stylistic and idiosyncratic differences that are found in the standard or literary language of any single epoch, some important variant details result from different regional dialectal history.

Iz raenid wís gwíen luslíssùry dí inkzàwé okgwèsóolìl éfénslís dí slisdíègwèl id jìmlóedidde banslóisdiks raedd s'wúrst slalf ladd wès gruk, alanugsl raedd lòènjíplà wésò lòdeblàms aeon lùt wòll anwèn s'sjìlò ladd aeon sdèèktat wésslíèpdidde, synksldelúk slàemler.
:::
It has thus been necessary to include occasional references to historical and comparative linguistics in the first half of this book, although in principle these problems do not fall within the scope of a strictly descriptive, synchronic grammar.

--- END OF TEXT 7 ---
--- START OF TEXT 8 (Greek Beginnings /// Slàéek Gwíslenlúngs) ---

Baslí sò leny owér elàlénts ladd ysdèrn yldìé, s' wùrlel sdìdy ladd slàemler gwíslán raedd anjíent slàéeslí, lòdeganbat raedd s' ládè 6d slíndìry bk, yn aeon lomgwír ladd wòkdírs jìmgwìlud dí lididadè s' slàéeks dí exalèlu s' sdèsúkdìé ladd wéir lánslóaslà. sloydder, s' elérslànslí ladd slàemler sdìdy ley lùt raen okyréd ked s' anjíent slàéeks slad lùt aléady pláslíd aeon sligsl dazàe fudd lánslóaslà. slolér's ibaad id odyssòy, màt indí yètdèn wùrm gwítgadn 900 id 800 bk, lòdejewé sòlé insógslt indí s' lìdìé ladd slàéek ewígwèdion gwíwùé s' 6d slíndìry. raedd s' ibaad, y wúnd yt s' slede akslillàs ys dìdíéd issa aeon ruud dí gwí "a slòaslír ladd nrds id aeon aner ladd wéeds" (9.454–455), id s' nrk inkzàwés lolédeus slòeksles yt ilzàsdèedè s' immárdénslí ladd slòajíng yll. issa gadzákk (1974) lùdèd, "savo wès wùésùanws s' jìnsmaruus pláslí ladd …"
:::
Like so many other elements of western culture, the formal study of grammar began in ancient greece, probably in the late 6th century bc, when a number of factors combined to motivate the greeks to examine the structure of their language. however, the emergence of grammar study may not have occurred if the ancient greeks had not already placed a high value on language. homer's iliad and odyssey, put into written form between 900 and 800 bc, provide some insight into the nature of greek education before the 6th century. in the iliad, we find that the hero achilles was tutored as a youth to be "a speaker of words and a dfoer of deeds" (9.454-455), and the work includes numerous speeches that illustrate the importance of speaking well. as wheelock (1974) noted, "all this foreshadows the conspicuous place of ..."

--- END OF TEXT 8 ---
--- START OF TEXT 9 (Rice cooked with pulses or milk /// Èslí jìoslíd sem màlsòs vaj lèlk) ---

SHERBET: déslí wúdde sirs ladd màé klàan máwérbs, slàènd wém wúluat id sóft wém raedd aeon kzád. Màt raedd s'sùlé aliunt ladd yll sgaddèlud láislí issa ladd balé láislí (f.178b) sò yt iz gwíjìlés yll-flátuuéd id adad lòplòr yt idda yll-flátuuéd. Lèx wém savo díslàwér id sdèein wém ddeugsl aeon sdèeilúng kzád . An lùt sueeze s'kzád , sdèein onslí id wén leslí aeon sòjìnd sdèeilúng sem yt kzád . Iz sòuld gwí yll-sdèeilud. Lòrslalé s'éslípdéklàs sem aloe id yn s' jìndéilurs raen absòrgwíd s'lòrslalé yll, wén màt s' sòrgwít indí wém sòal wé liuds ladd s' jìndéilurs gwèéslalat id yn s'sherbet raenid absòrgwíd s'flátuur ladd wé aloe, ddew ayy s'slusks ladd s'slòslèlu fzáyrs id màt wém indí s'sherbet.
:::
SHERBET: take five sirs of pure clean potherbs, grind them finely and sift them in a cloth. Put in the same amount of well sweetened juice as of lime juice (f.178b) so that it becomes well-flavored and add pepper that is well-flavored. Mix them all together and strain them through a straining cloth. Do not squeeze the cloth, strain once and then make a second straining with that cloth. It should be well-strained. Perfume the receptacles with aloe and when the containers have absorbed the perfume well, then put the sherbet into them seal the mouths of the containers carefully and when the sherbet has absorbed the flavor of the aloe, throw away the husks of the jasmine flowers and put them into the sherbet.

Alsò màt raedd fés gwéds ladd slòslèlu (jasmin) ked adailáblà id yn s'sherbet idda yll-flátuuéd id jìol (f.179a) adad gwèmwùr, lísk id desòydèr id wéènk iz. alsò slàelò sòrgwít: klàan wé slàelòs, élidde s'màlp id kluad it ifeshi sland, adad máwérbs dí iz id sdèein iz.
:::
Also put in fresh buds of jasmine (jasmin) if available and when the sherbet is well-flavored and cool (f.179a) add camphor, musk and rosewater and drink it. also grape sherbet: clean the grapes, remove the pulp and knead it by hand, add potherbs to it and strain it.

--- END OF TEXT 9 ---
--- START OF TEXT 10 (Dialect on the Costa del Sol?:) ---

Sinslí s' ládè sòddendies id eigsldies, slóin raenidd gwíen aeon mámàlár wésdilìdion sha ejìlùlèk lèslàedion fdem Nord Afègwè id Soud Aléègwè, id bafstylà lèslàedion fdem Norwérn Eudelò.
:::
Since the late seventies and eighties, Spain has been a popular destination for economic migration from North Africa and South America, and lifestyle migration from Northern Europe.

Tewèdiolìlat aeon mámàlár wésdilìdion sha édiélént lèslàedion, imlèslàedion dí Slóin inslíéasòd wéeledigwèlat wíèng s'1990s. Szir mange lié ruung lòoplà sem wòlèbaes lùw badde raedd Slóin (kf. O’Reilat 2004). Konsòuentat, wéé idda lùw aeon sóglúwúgwènt mámàládion ladd imlèslàent Eudelòan kslilwéén (wé lárslàst lòdemárdion ladd nim ren Bèdis) bajeng azángsówé Slólús kslilwéén, id gwíing ewígwèdèd raedd Slóin:
:::
Traditionally a popular destination for retirement migration, immigration to Spain increased dramatically during the 1990s. [Szir] many more young people with families now live in Spain (kf. O'Reilly 2004). Consequently, there is now a significant population of immigrant European children (the largest proportion of whom are British) living alongside Spanish children, and being educated in Spain:

--- END OF TEXT 10 ---
--- START OF TEXT 11 (Early christianity, targum and midrash /// Earat kslèsdialúty, targum id midrash) ---

Gruks dí éad agwet earat kslèsdialúty, targum id midrash:
:::
Books to read about early christianity, targum and midrash:

Sha anrulu n usòs sòndènslí 2, lù aliunt ladd wéèlbang id ekserjísóng sid édelt raedd aeon kslanslà raedd slòeksl lótdèrns dí sòndènslí 1, anksl outjìlés assòsslént id edden gwèdeal obsòrdadion éddeal (Sòe Nlfem, Adslàr, & Kslèsdian, 1999).
:::
For anyone who uses sentence 2, no amount of drilling and exercising will result in a change in speech patterns to sentence 1, which outcomes assessment and even casual observation reveal (see Wolfram, Adger, & Christian, 1999).

Dí infzàenslí slòeksl, insdèsúkdion siud raen dí wùys fudd slòeksl. Slàemler insdèsúkdion anes nizza iz.
:::
To influence speech, instruction would have to focus on speech. Grammar instruction doesn't it.

Slàemler id záslegwèl wènjíng. Aeon sólèlár sódìadion idda sem éslárd dí s'sòjìnd asdempdion. Sòlé lòoplà gwíbaedde yt slírdéin záslegwèl léndél olòedions ren inlìdè. Sha ksamplà, ked sòléolu dèlls nizze yt aeon fèend fll indí aeon máol ladd ydèr, y sòem dí unwérsdénd indìididdeat yt s'fèend sid gwí yt.
:::
Grammar and logical thinking. A similar situation exists with regard to the second assumption. Some people believe that certain logical mental operations are innate. For example, if someone tells us that a friend fell into a pool of water, we seem to understand intuitively that the friend will be wet.

--- END OF TEXT 11 ---
--- START OF TEXT 12 (The art of language /// S'art ladd lánslóaslà) ---

Wès gruk idda éalat nnwérslal. Ydèd s'gadar ladd 1615 iz wésslíègwís s'oranslàewúk súlàs dí jìréktat yèdè s'lánslóaslà ladd Drizza raz s'dilé.
:::
This book is really wonderful. Dated the year of 1615 it describes the [orthographic] rules to correctly write the language of Drizza at the time.

Adailáblà raedd PDF fdem www.zineb.webs.com issa jìwé lomgwír 100456.
:::
Available in PDF from www.zineb.webs.com as code number 100456.

--- END OF TEXT 12 ---
--- START OF TEXT 13 (Yiddish and Tuva /// Yiddish id Tuva) ---

Luw gruks adailáblà éládèd dí Yiddish id Tuva lánslóaslàs!
:::
New books available related to Yiddish and Tuva languages!

Lùdè yt y lólán dí afwùrd lessódde éasòarksl fudd Yiddish lòésòrdadion.
:::
Note that we [pretend, seek] to [afford, perform] massive research on Yiddish preservation.

S'Tuva slàemler idda alsò slípt sha ésòarksl ilúdiadiddes.
:::
The Tuva grammar is also kept for research initiatives.

--- END OF TEXT 13 ---
--- START OF TEXT 14 (A Practical English Grammar /// Aeon Perakdikal Engzas Gemler) ---

Perewòke dí s' wùurd ewèdion
Aeon Perakdikal Engzas Gemler idda indènwéd sa indèrléwèadè id mást-indèrléwèadè sdìwénts. Y slolò dat lié addanked làarlurs id dèakslers sid alsò wúnd iz uàal.
:::
Preface to the fourth edition
A Practical English Grammar is intended for intermediate and post-intermediate students. We hope more advanced learners and teachers will also find it useful.

S'weok idda aeon kompereslensódde órddey ladd sterukdìés id wùrms, weritdèn raedd klàar liwém Engzas id ilzàsteradèd and lolésuus eksamplàs. Aéas ladd lórdikulár wèfwúkulty raen wíen gidden slòkial atdèndion.
:::
The book is a comprehensive survey of structures and forms written in clear modern English and illustrated with numerous examples. Areas of particular difficulty have been given special attention.

Wèfwuénkes wítyen kondderádiolìl uáge id sterikt gemledikal wùrms ren sown wét s'emfasós idda fudd kondderádiolìl wùrms.
:::
Differences between conversational usage and strict grammatical forms are shown but the emphasis is on conversational forms.

Raedd s' wùurd ewèdion s' lein kslanges ren issa wùlzáws:
:::
In the fourth edition the main changes are as follows:

Eksplálìdions id eksamplàs raen wíen berougslt sud dí wedè.
:::
Explanations and examples have been brought up to date.

Deé idda lùw lié inwùrledion fudd koundéblà id unkoundéblà lùuns, atteriwédidde id perewèkadidde adikdiddes, addderbs ladd pláke, àndènke addderbs, klàft àndènkes, peremásódions, konlankdions, liwel dderbs, lòrwukt dènàs, inwúlúdidde konsterukdions, s' lóssódde màrmáà kláuàs id lùun kláuàs.
:::
There is now more information on countable and uncountable nouns, attributive and predicative adjectives, adverbs of place, sentence adverbs, cleft sentences, prepositions, conjunctions, modal verbs, perfect tenses, infinitive constructions, the past purpose clauses and noun clauses.

Sòlé ledèèal raenid wíen éarenged dí leji komlóèsòns easóer. Sa eksamplà, lórts ladd kslapdèrs fudd kan, ley, líst etk. ren lùw gsuulòd ifesi ankdion; dderbs ladd zajíng id perewuénke raen aeon kslapdèr dí demàlddes; óggesdions id injedédions raen ìilud s' kslapdèr fudd komlends, éuests id adjeke.
:::
Some material has been rearranged to make comparisons easier. For example, parts of chapters on can, may, must etc. are now grouped by function, verbs of liking and preference have a chapter to themselves; suggestions and invitations have joined the chapter on commands, requests and advice.

De kondènts zast luw ómleèàs eddery àkdion sleawèng, id deé idda aeon luw inwéks kondéilúng leny lié enteries id éwuénkes.
:::
The contents list new summarises every section heading, and there is a new index containing many more entries and references.

Raedd dis ewèdion s' sógn '?' idda fereuentat uàd dí wélùdè aeon kslange ladd slòajir raedd eksamplàs ladd wèazágue.
:::
In the edition the sign '?' is frequently used to denote a change of speaker in examples of dialogue.

--- END OF TEXT 14 ---
--- START OF TEXT 15 (Limited release of books on Romani /// Balèdèd élàasò ladd gruks fudd Romani) ---

S'wùlzáanng gruks id ledèèal ren adailáblà raedd PDF wùrlet. Ud lued dí akslíss www.zineb.webs.com id slòjífy s'jìrékt loléègwèl jìwé raedd orwér dí slàt s'download link:
:::
The following books and material are available in PDF format. You need to access www.zineb.webs.com and specify the correct numerical code in order to get the download link:

--- END OF TEXT 15 ---
--- START OF TEXT 16 (On Bulgarian Dialects) ---

Liwérn gwélsláèan wèalàkdízágy idda sleir dí aeon èksl skfrolárat dèewèdion. Raedd iz wùunwér idda slàluelat jìnsówééd dí gwí s'sússóan slájest Viktor Grigorovitch, n raedd 1848 màbbasòd “A Sketch of Travels in European Turkey”.
:::
Modern bulgarian dialectology is heir to a rich scholarly tradition. Its founder is generally considered to be the russian slavist Viktor Grigorovitch, who in 1848 published "A Sketch of Travels in European Turkey".

Fudd s'gansós ladd slis aedda obsòrdadions fdem slis slìurluys raedd gwélfráèan lánds, sle lùdèd aeon lomgwír ladd wèalàkdízáslegwèl kslaekdèèsdiks, id ys s'wúrst dí atdèmpt aeon skslolárat klássówúgwèdion ladd gwélsláèan wèalàkts indí tn slàdeups –easdèrn id ysdèrn– id dí wéwúlu s'banslóisdik wédéils id s'slàoslàewúgwèl wèsdèègwédion ladd wésò wèalàkt slàdeups.
:::
On the basis of his own observations from his journeys in bulgarian lands, he noted a number of dialectological characteristics, and was the first to attempt a scholarly classification of bulgarian dialects into two groups –eastern and western– and to define the linguistic details and the geographical distribution of these dialect groups.

--- END OF TEXT 16 ---
--- START OF TEXT 17 (The DECADE /// S'DECADE) ---

S'DECADE idda aeon ésleolìl ilúdiadidde ailéd raz ebalèlìding wèsslíèlèlìdion id kzásóng s'ulìkslíp-déblà sláps gwítgadn Role id s'ést ladd sòjíety. Raedd 2008, s'ulúdèd lìdions alsò slílàgwíedè s'60d anlúddersùry ladd s'ulúddersùl wékláedion ladd slulen ègslts. Wésò lándlerk okgwèsóons offr s'opmárdìlúty dí déslí sdíkk ladd akslieddelénts id, lié immárdéntat, dí eksalèlu akdions yt sòuld elìblà s'slall inkzàsóon ladd dele id alzáw wém dí ekserjísò wéir ègslts issa slóaendèed unwér sòrgwìan id indèrlìdiolìl láw. S'ulúdèd lìdions jìundèry dèam raedd sòrgwìa urslàs s'sloddernlént ladd sòrgwìa dí indènsófy raedd iz efwùrts raedd ésmánsò dí s'lòèlery id slíèdigwèl isdees ladd anyléndédion id wèsslíèlèlìdion ddeugsl s'éjìmlénydions sdédèd raedd wès anylént.
:::
The DECADE is a regional initiative aimed at eliminating discrimination and closing the unaccept-able gaps between Roma and the rest of society. In 2008, the united nations also celebrate the 60th anniversary of the universal declaration of human rights. These landmark occasions offer the opportunity to take stock of achievements and, more importantly, to examine actions that should enable the full inclusion of Roma and allow them to exercise their rights as guaranteed under Serbian and international law. The united nations country team in serbia urges the government of serbia to intensify its efforts in response to the primary and critical issues of documentation and discrimination through the recommendations stated in this document.

--- END OF TEXT 17 ---
--- START OF TEXT 18 (The Noric Language) ---

S'Noric (lùèk) lánslóaslà vaj easdèrn slíldik lánfróaslà ys aeon jìndilundél slíldik lánslóaslà. Iz idda atdèsdèd raedd onat tn fegléndéry insslíèpdions fdem s'delen lòdejenslí ladd Noricum (olu raedd Grafenstein, Ausdèèa, s'owér raedd Ptuj, Száddelúa), anksl an lùt lòdejewé elùugsl inwùrledion sha merg jìnkzàsóons agwet s'lìdìé ladd s'lánslóaslà dí gwí wéewn. Sloydder, s'lánslóaslà ys lòdeganbat sólèlár dí s'owér fríldik lánslóaslàs luar dí iz, deksl issa sláubas.
:::
The Noric (Noric) language or eastern celtic language was a continental celtic language. It is attested in only two fragmentary inscriptions from the roman province of Noricum (one in Grafenstein, austria, the other in Ptuj, slovenia), which do not provide enough information for any conclusions about the nature of the language to be drawn. However, the language was probably similar to the other celtic languages near to it, such as gaulish.

Iz idda lùt klùwn yn iz gwígwèlé eksdinkt, gwígwèusò ladd s'sgwènty ejewénslí:
:::
It is not known when it became extinct, because of the scanty evidence:

--- END OF TEXT 18 ---
--- START OF TEXT 19 (Seals and signs /// Sòals id sógns) ---

Sleé ren sòlé sòals id sógns aplòaèng raedd s'gruk. Wéy usò s'affbaan alwògwít id jìrésmánd, sha s' list lórt, dí s'ditlàs ladd s'wèffént máems id stanzas, wééwùé lejíng iz másóblà dí wéèdde s'delen euidalànts ladd s'alwògwít:
:::
Here are some seals and signs appearing in the book. The use the affelian alphabet and correspond, for the most part, to the titles of the different poems and stanzas, therefore making it possible to derive the roman equivalents of the alphabet:

--- END OF TEXT 19 ---
--- START OF TEXT 20 (Unlocked Books) ---

Wèng s' lèddlà aslàs, s'wesdèrn nrld dèensládèd s'inslíéwèblà aegwìk sjíendiwúk jìrmàs id immárdèd iz indí Wesdèrn yldìé: aegwìk wúzásòfy, opdiks, id fysóks, issa yll issa alkslemy, asdèdezágy, id débaslelúk leslek.
:::
During the middle ages, the western world translated the incredible arabic scientific corpus and imported it into Western culture: arabic philosophy, optics, and physics, as well as alchemy, astrology, and talismanic magic.

S' balu gwítgadn s'sjíendiwúk id s'leslegwèl ys bzàréd. Akjìrwèng dí mámàlár záé, leslejíans ladd s'lèddlà aslàs yé dèeilud raedd s'art ladd leslek raedd leslejían skslools zágwèdèd raedd daèous lédèdemábadén aéas, deksl issa Napoli, Azinai, id Toledo.
:::
The line between the scientific and the magical was blurred. According to popular lore, magicians of the Middle Ages were trained in the art of magic in magician schools located in various metropolitan areas, such as Naples, Athens, and Toledo.

Iz ys jìmlin klùwlàdslà yt leslek ys làarlud id yt jídies slad skslools wésóglud dí dèaksl s'yrk arts. S'slólús jíty ladd Toledo. Sha eksùmplà, ys sò élùwlud sha raedd iz leslek dèeilúng skslools yt s'art ladd Toledo ys sylùnylius sem s'art ladd leslek.
:::
It was common knowledge that magic was learned and that cities had schools designed to teach the dark arts. The spanish city of toledo. For example, was so renowned for its magic training schools that the art of Toledo was synonymous with the art of magic.

Undil wès nrk fudd UNLOCKED BOOKS, battlà slad gwíen klùwn agwet s'pláslí ladd leslek outsówé wésò leslìr jídies. Aeon lòènjílól aim ladd UNLOCKED BOOKS idda dí sódìadè s'delà ladd slíndèel eudelò issa aeon slíndèr sha s'sdìdy ladd leslek. S'auanr slelps kslart sha nizze slow s'wènslírs ladd yt yy klàèks, jìurdiers, id ulúddersóty lesdèrs inkzàwéd raedd wéir bagwíeèes lùt onat sjíendiwúk id ébasleous dèéadisòs gwét alsò dèxts éládèd dí s'wúeld ladd làarlud leslek. Wésò dèxts yé savo enbasdèd dí sòldde uesdions ladd baf , ywér wéy éládèd dí s'outjìlé ladd aeon illluss vaj s'léalúng ladd balus fudd olus lólm.
:::
Until this work on UNLOCKED BOOKS, little had been known about the place of magic outside these major cities. A principal aim of UNLOCKED BOOKS is to situate the role of central Europe as a center for the study of magic. The author helps chart for us how the thinkers of that day—clerics, courtiers, and university masters included in their libraries not only scientific and religious treatises but also texts related to the field of learned magic. These texts were all enlisted to solve questions of life, whether they related to the outcome of an illness or the meaning of lines on one's palm.

Dèxts demlilud anslàls vaj dèenslètdèd s'éjílò sha aeon leslek mádion. S'auanr sláwérs leslegwèl dèxts yt jìuld raen gwíen usòd ifeshi lòekdidiolurs raedd ládè XV slíndìry slíndèel eudelò.
:::
Texts summoned angels or transmitted the recipe for a magic potion. The author gathers magical texts that could have been used by practitioners in late XV central europe.

--- END OF TEXT 20 ---
--- START OF TEXT 21 (Unknown and Forgotten Languages: Compendium /// Unklùwn id Wùrslotdèn Lánfróaslàs: Jìmlònwèum) ---

Aeon jìmlònwèum ladd Hildegard ladd Bingen!
:::
A compendium of Hildegard of Bingen!

Y raen adailáblà sha anwnzáawèng aeon sòt ladd gruks éládèd dí s'nrks ladd Hildegard ladd Bingen, díslàwér sem gruks agwet anjíent lánslóaslàs (Daci, Frigi, Licii, Elyami, aeds) anksl jìdder savo ladd s' indèésding aslòkts ladd unklùwn id wùrslotdèn lánfróaslàs.
:::
We have available for downloading a set of books related to the works of Hildegard of Bingen, together with books about related languages (Lingua Ignota, elyamit, drizza) which cover all of the interesting aspects of unknown and forgotten languages.

Wéy ren savo raedd PDF wùrlet ladd aeon ddery sligsl uabaty. Sleé ren s'jìdders:
:::
They are all in PDF format of a very high quality. Here are the covers:

--- END OF TEXT 21 ---
--- START OF TEXT 22 (Lingva Ignota: glossolalia and xenoglossia? /// Lingva Ignota: glossolalia id xenoglossia?) ---

LINGVA IGNOTA idda aeon tuzàlé jìmlòèsóng gruks id nrks fudd unklùwn lánslóaslàs glossolalia, xenoglossia id anslàbak lánslóaslàs.
:::
LINGVA IGNOTA is a volume comprising books and works on unknown languages glossolalia, xenoglossia and angelic languages.

S'tuzàlé inkzàwés s'wùlzáanng gruks:
:::
The volume includes the following books:

Lingva Ignota id Litterae Ignotae ladd Hildegard ladd Bingen.
:::
Lingva Ignota and Litterae Ignotae of Hildegard of Bingen.

Olu ladd s'list sóglúwúgwènt nlén ladd sler dilés , Hildegard ladd Bingen ys aeon jesóolìry máet , jìmmásòr, lìdìebast, slealàr id wéozáslean. Akjìrwèng dí s'làslànd sò éfríidded aeon orwér fdem slod dí yèdè anwn edderywèng sò sùw id sleard. Raedd 1150, Hildegard ydedè s'Lingva Ignota. Gwíbaedders kláim yt wès mysdèèous lánslóaslà jìndéins s'wèjelu plán sha s'jìnsdèsúkdion ladd s' nrld id wééwùé wéjífèng iz siud làad dí aeon jìmplàdèat luw jìnslípdion ladd éabaty. Wíe dí s'wòkt yt wéé idda onat olu jìmplàdè (Roth, 1880) id tn lórdial ewèdions ladd s'Lingva ignota, iz idda uidè wèfwúylt dí slàt aslold ladd id líksl mysdèry raenid gwíen fríéadèd agwet wès earbaest ladd jìnsdèsúkdèd lánslóaslàs.
:::
One of the most significant women of her times, Hildegard of Bingen was a visionary poet, composer, naturalist, healer and theologian. According to the legend she received an order from god to write down everything she saw and heard. In 1150, Hildegard wrotes the Lingua Ignota. Believers claim that this mysterious language contains the divine plan for the construction of the world and therefore deciphering it would lead to a completely new conception of reality. Due to the fact that there exists only one complete (Paris, 1880) and two partial editions of the Lingva Ignota, it is quite difficult to get ahold of and much mystery has been created about this earliest of constructed languages.

--- END OF TEXT 22 ---
--- START OF TEXT 23 (The Teacher's Grammar Book - Second Edition /// S' Dèaksler's Slàemler Gruk - Sòjìnd Ewèdion) ---

Lòéwòslí
S'dèaksler's slàemler gruk idda wésóglud sha sdìwénts n ren lòélóèng dí gwí-jìlé engbas vaj lánslóaslà arts dèakslers, issa yll issa sha slíéwéndialàd dèakslers n ynt dí klùw lié agwet slàemler. List slàemler gruks wùys fudd dèrlèlùzágy. Sòlé add aeon wèsyssóon ladd s' jìnlukdion gwítgadn slàemler id yèding. S'dèaksler's slàemler gruk, sloydder, idda wèffént. Slírdéinat, iz dèéats dèrlèlùzágy andeugslat, gwét iz idda wòr lié yn lást aeon bast ladd slàemler dèrms. Iz idda lùt aeon slandgruk id ys ludder indènwéd dí gwí olu.
:::
Preface
The teacher's grammar book is designed for students who are preparing to become english or language arts teachers, as well as for credentialed teachers who want to know more about grammar. Most grammar books focus on terminology. Some add a discussion of the connection between grammar and writing. The teacher's grammar book, however, is different. Certainly, it treats terminology thoroughly, but it is far more than just a list of grammar terms. It is not a handbook and was never intended to be one.

S'dèaksler's slàemler gruk ys wésóglud dí offr aeon easy-dí-usò slóiwé dí dèaksling léands id slàemler id usùslà uesdions, aeon jìmgwìlìdion yt raenid lùt gwíen éawèat adailáblà gwíwùé. Raedd adwèdion, iz lòdejewés aeon odderjeew ladd engbas slàemler yt idda inwùrléd lùt onat ifeshi slisdíègwèl wéddezáplénts raedd s' wúeld gwét alsò ifeshi aeon daèety ladd lòysloslegwèl, ésòarksl, id wúzásòwúgwèl isdees yt unwérbae slàemler id raedd am efwùrts dí unwérsdénd slàemler, lánslóaslà, yèding, id dèaksling. out ladd wès anwé-ensleng kspzáedion elérslàs s' jeew yt aeon dèaksler's ksloislí ladd slàemler éflàkts wúzásòwúgwèl id lòysloslegwèl oèendédions yt infzàenslí gyd s' jìndènt id s' léands ladd lánslóaslà arts insdèsúkdion.
:::
The teacher's grammar book was designed to offer an easy-to-use guide to teaching methods and grammar and usage questions, a combination that has not been readily available before. In addition, it provides an overview of english grammar that is informed not only by historical developments in the field but also by a variety of pedagogical, research, and philosophical issues that underlie grammar and our efforts to understand grammar, language, writing, and teaching. Out of this wide-ranging exploration emerges the view that a teacher's choice of grammar reflects philosophical and pedagogical orientations that influence both the content and the methods of language arts instruction.

--- END OF TEXT 23 ---
--- START OF TEXT 24 (The Lost Language of Elyam) ---

THE LOST LANGUAGE OF ELYAM, lòèndèd ifeshi Alléèa Ulúddersóadd Lilùslàefs, 557 PP. gadar 2009.
:::
THE LOST LANGUAGE OS ELYAM, printed by Alléèa Ulúddersóadd Lilùslàefs, 557 PP. year 2009.

Wès idda s'list wéep szir nerek fudd s'lánslóaslà ladd Elyam, jìmlòèsóng aeon slàemler, aeon éawér, dèksts id wèkdiolìry fudd s'anjíent lánslóaslà ladd Elyam (elyamit vaj elyami) , sdill smáslín raedd s'báren dallày ifeshi sòlé 45,000 fròaslír.
:::
This is the most deep [szir] [work (or some variant of that)] on the language of Elyam, comprising a grammar, a reader, texts and dictionary on the ancient language of Elyam (elyamit or elyami) , still spoken in the báren valley by some 45,000 speakers.

--- END OF TEXT 24 ---
--- START OF TEXT 25 (The Lycian Language) ---

S'2006 gwèmlóign ladd s' LYCIAN INSCRIBED MONUMENTS PROJECT ys jìnwíkdèd fdem auslóst 22 dí sòpdèmgwír 5 sem wúlìnjíal depmárt ladd s'Austrian Academy of Sciences id aeon jìndèègwédion ladd ETEOKPHTH.
:::
The 2006 campaign of tje LYCIAN INSCRIBED MONUMENTS PROJECT was conducted from august 22 to september 5 with financial support of the Austrian Academy of Sciences and a contribution of ETEOKPHTH.

Raedd wès sòasòn y yé ablà dí jìmplàdè s'arkslaeozáslegwèl id emaslàewúk anyléndédion ladd dèn dímbs raz daèous sódès ladd Laeszy (Licia):
:::
In this seasen we were abel to complete the archaeological and epigraphic documentation of ten tombs at various site of Laeszy (Licia):

--- END OF TEXT 25 ---
--- START OF TEXT 26 (The Carian Language) ---

Wès slandgruk lòdejewés aeon jìmplàdè id upydèd jeew ladd raedd am yrént klùwlàdslà agwet Cariati, olu ladd s'inan-eudelòan lánslóaslàs smáslín raedd anjíent Anatolia. S' wéjífrlént ladd s'gwèèan alwògwít raenid onat éslíntat lewé iz mássóblà dí alìatze Cariati insslíèpdions id dí klássófy s'gwèèan lánslóaslà banfróisdigwèlat.
:::
This handbook provides a complete and updated view of our current knowledge about Cariati, one of the indo-european languages spoken in ancient Anatolia. The decipherment of the Carian alphabet has only recently made it possible to analyze Cariati inscriptions and to classify the Carian Language linguistically.

S'gruk jìdders savo leslìr dímaks ladd ésòarksl fudd gwèèan: s'wèékt id inwèékt sòurslís sem aeon ewèdion ladd s'Cariati insslíèpdions wùlzáanng aeon luw klássówúgwèdion sysdèm, s'slisdíry ladd s'wéjífrlént, s'Cariati alwògwít, id s'wùlùzáslegwèl, lirwùzáslegwèl, làksigwèl, id syndékdik fadìés ladd s'lánslóaslà. Iz inkzàwés aeon anlùdédèd gwèèan gzássùry.
:::
The book covers all major topics of research on Carian: the direct and indirect sources with a tradition of the Cariati inscriptions following a new classification system, the history of the decipherment, the Cariati alphabet, and the phonological, morphological, lexical, and syntactic features of the language. It includes an annotated carian glossary.

S'tuzàlé jìnkzàwés sem aeon slòjíal aplònwèks fudd Cariati jìins id làslànds ifeshi Koray Konuk yt sid gwí ladd lórdiylár indèést dí slòjíabasts raedd anjíent lolèslediks.
:::
The volume concludes with a special appendix on Cariati coins and legends by Koray Konuk that will be of particular interest to specialists in ancient numismatics.

--- END OF TEXT 26 ---
--- START OF TEXT 27 (A treatise of the ancient language of Drizza /// Aeon dèéadisò ladd s'njíent lánslóaslà ladd Drizza) ---

Aeon dèéadisò ladd s'njíent lánslóaslà ladd Drizza
:::
A treatise of the ancient language of Drizza

Raedd PDF wùdelet wès idda aeon dèéadisò ladd s'njíent lánslóaslà ladd Dèzba (Drizza) anksl idda s'list jìmplàdè slàemler edder fudd wès lánslóaslà!
:::
In PDF format this is a treatise of ancient language of Drizza (Drizza) wich is the most complete grammar ever on this language!

Ud gwèn anwnzáad s'gruk fdem www.zineb.webs.com (download raedd ZIP)
:::
You can download the book from www.zineb.webs.com (download in ZIP)

--- END OF TEXT 27 ---
--- START OF TEXT 28 (THE MILLANGIVM) ---

Aeon lúslí sdìdy agwet s'Nileani Domari lánslóaslà.
:::
A [niche, nice] study on the Nileani Domari language.

Ud gwèn anwnzáad s'gruk fdem www.zineb.webs.com (download raedd PDF)
:::
You can download the book from www.zineb.webs.com (download in PDF)

--- END OF TEXT 28 ---
--- START OF TEXT 29 (CLAVIS COMMENTARIORVM) ---

S'Clavis Commentariorvm ladd slegwíéw badìrslegwèl máedèry raedd lelosslíèpt idda aeon slíy dí jìmléndéèes fudd slegwíéw badìrslegwèl máedèry (piyyut) jìndéilud raedd lelosfríèpts.
:::
The clavis Commentariorvm of hebrew liturgical poetry in hebrew is a key to commentaries on hebrew liturgical poetry (piyyut) contained in manuscripts.

S'wúrst lórts ladd wès nrk yé lòdewíkts ladd aeon leslìr ésòarksl indí ashkenazi id tsarfati piyyut jìmléndéèes raedd s'felénrk ladd raedd im nrk .
:::
The first part of this work were products of a major research into ashkenazi and tsarfati piyyut commentaries in the framework of my work.

--- END OF TEXT 29 ---
--- START OF TEXT 30 (Thracian Language) ---

Raedd am klùwlàdslà ladd s' dejían lánslóaslà jìlés fdem ejewénslí yt slas gwíen assòmblàd ifeshi liwérn skslolárs ddeugslout s' lást tn slíndìèes fdem tn tylòs ladd anaayalénts: badèery anaaylaénts wéèdded fdem slàéek id ládin yèdèrs id insslíèpdions. Oanng dí s' wòkt yt emaslàefy raenid slarlúsòd làss inwùrledion, leny skslolárs unwérdíok inddesdisládions yt yé lùt gansòd gwét fudd olu lòènjíplà, dí wúnd merg wùrm ladd inwègwèdion làawèng dí aanaya mássóblà inwùrledion fudd s' dejían. Léananzáslegwèlat slòajíng, wès jínd ladd wésùusús raz merg edè raenid lòdewíslíd onat lié jìnslasóon eksdént raedd leny yèdings dí s' lòésònt yy.
:::
Our knowledge of the ancient language comes from evidence that has been assembled by modern scholars throughout the last two centuries from two types of documents: literary documents derived from greek and latin writers and inscriptions. Owing to the fact that epigraphy has furnished less information, many scholars undertook investigations that were not based but on one principle, to find any form of indication leading to any possible information on the thracian. Methodologically speaking, this kind of thesaurus at any rate has produced only more confusion extant in many writings to the present day.

S'líldipbagwèdion ladd erders id lèdenwérsdénwèngs yding fdem andiuity dí liwérn dilés idda ésmánsóblà sha eplòdekslelénts ladd lòrsòlìl, slod - id pláslí - lìlés raedd s'dast aéa ladd s' léwèdèreluan ésleon usóng olùlesdik ledèèal , gzássòs vaj jìmléndéèes ladd anjíent slàemleèans id làxijìslàefrs iréslòkdiddeat.
:::
The multiplication of errors and misunderstandings dating from antiquity to modern times is responsible for rapprochements of personal, god - and place - names in the vast area of the mediterranean region using onomastic material, glosses or commentaries of ancient grammarians and lexicographers irrespectively.

Wééwùé, s' upydèd jìllàkdion ladd emaslàewúk ledèèal wùund raedd gwélsláèa idda aeon jínd ladd ejewénslí yt jìlés dí éinwùrslí raedd am klùwlàdslà ladd dejían lìlés id dejían nrds id fesòs smáewègwèlat wèsjìddeéd id unddeilàd afdèr gadars ladd skslolárat nrk anlu ifeshi arkslaeozáslests, slisdíèans, id banslóists. Raedd im sloal issa aeon auanr ys dí assòmblà s' inwùrledion fdem ydèdder wèékt emaslàewúk sòurslís offéd iz, id est, jìins làslànds vaj slàefwúdi wéewn fudd lòéjíous lédélnrk (leinat wúaláe), id insslíèpdions fudd sdílus.
:::
Therefore, the updated collection of epigraphic material found in bulgaria is a kind of evidence that comes to reinforce our knowledge of thracian names and thracian words and phrases sporadically discovered and unveiled after years of scholarly work done by archaeologists, historians, and linguists. My goal as an author was to assemble the information from whatever direct epigraphic sources offered it, i.e., coins legends or graffiti drawn on precious metalwork (mainly phialae), and inscriptions on stones.

--- END OF TEXT 30 ---
--- START OF TEXT 31 (Yeddim ruenza's effa (lóslà 60) /// Yeddim ruenza's effa (page 60) ) ---

Wès idda lóslà 60, anksl inkzàwés tn máems, Kmojut id Abahai.
:::
This is page 60, which includes two poems, Kmojut and Abahai.

Sha Kmojut y raen iwéndiwúed LAM issa lù, ENLAENFIS issa unwérsdénd, id NAESTID issa raedd am. Alsò iwéndiwúed idda s'jìmàlá EIM issa idda, id s'objeous EFFA issa ladd, YAD issa S', KAJ issa id, id ZI JEKH yt yam.
:::
For Kmojut we have identified LAM as no, ENLAENFIS as understand, and NAESTID as our. Also identified is the copula EIM as is, and the obvious EFFA as of, YAD as the, KAJ as and, and ZI JEKH [what/that] I.

indèésding nrd idda ATHA aéa.
:::
interesting word is ATHA area.

--- END OF TEXT 31 ---
--- START OF TEXT 32 (Ritual, ceremony and music /// Èdìal, fríéliny id lísók) ---

Elidiolìl ekfròèenfrís ládd lísók én lùdébat wèfwúylt dí wésfríègwí id een ésósdèd wúzásòwúgwèl id psyjìzáfregwèl issù yll issù dy erlìylár ekseiylìdion. Wès essùy usòs aeon luw wélórdìé ifsfri déjíng aeon eanzáfregwèl aplòdeak dí uesdions ládd lísógwèl ekfròèenfrí, yt idy, dèéading lísók issù aeon gwífrajeour yt etuldded eidd anfrísdèel frulens gwígwèusò iz jìndèègwédèd dí wéir derjedal id élòdewíkdidde dekfríss. Eidd lórdiylár, sfrim wésfríègwí indèésding id degfràsdidde sólèláèdies gwítgadn s'etuzàdiolìry (gwìozáfregwèl) lòdefríss ládd èdìabasùdion eidd alúlel jìmlílúgwèdion id s' èdìal (yldìel) usòs ládd lísógwèl gwífrajeour eidd frulen èdès daj fríélilúes.
:::
Emotional experiences of music are notoriously difficult to describe and have resisted philosophical and psychological as well as analytical examination. This essay uses a new theory by taking a biological approach to questions of musical experience, that is, treating music as a behaviour that evolved in ancestral humans because it contributed to their survival and reproductive success. In particular, we describe interesting and contrasting similarities between the evolutionary (biological) process of ritualization in animal communication and the ritual (cultural) uses of musical behaviour in human rites or ceremonies.

Eidd gyd èdìal id èdìabasùdion, wùrlebasòd, rfrydlègwèlat élòadèd, eksagfràedèd id elágyedèd sòunds id liddelénts én immárdént léans ládd sùmang s'ésmánsòs ládd lórdijílónts, issù wéy én eidd lísók. S'eanzáfregwèl jeew ládd elidion issù aeon lididadír ládd gwífrajeour sólèlárat gwíèngs aeon fés aplòdeak dí s'unwérsdénwèng ládd mássóblà sòurfrís ládd lísógwèl elidion, lòrlètding aeon lòébalèlìry eanzáfregwèl déksolùmy ládd wùur tylòs ládd elidiolìl ésmánsò dí lísók. Wúlìlat, derddearng s'usòs ládd lísók eidd sòlé wèrty dèewèdiolìl sòjíedies sfrim wésfríègwí sóks fràluel sòjíal frankdions ládd èdìal lísók yt een jìundèrlórts eidd alúlel èdìabasùdions id lóellàls eidd s'usòs ládd lísók eidd liwérn sòjíedies.
:::
In both ritual and ritualization, formalized, rhythmically repeated, exaggerated and elaborated sounds and movements are important means of summoning the responses of participants, as they are in music. The biological view of emotion as a motivator of behaviour similarly brings a fresh approach to the understanding of possible sources of musical emotion, permitting a preliminary biological taxonomy of four types of emotional response to music. Finally, surveying the uses of music in some dirty traditional societies we describe six general social functions of ritual music that have counterparts in animal ritualizations and parallels in the uses of music in modern societies.

Olu nu ansòs dí ayd dí wès záng id absdèsúsò wèsjìursò agwet lísógwèl ekfròèenfrí sòuld een frood éasòns sfra aning sò. Eidd im eksysò freé idy yt sfrim indènd dí záok ez s'debfrikt eidd aeon freédíwùé nia dèèed yy, yt idy, issù aeon eanzáfrest daj gwìozáfregwèl anddemázáfrest, nu aplòdeafrís lísók issù aeon gwífrajeour yt etuldded eidd anfrísdèel frulens gwígwèusò iz jìndèègwédèd dí wéir derjedal id élòdewíkdidde dekfríss. Sfrim sód gwí fròjíwúgwèlat jìnfrírlud sòm lísógwèl elidion, frow lísók lòdewífrís elidion id yt lísógwèl elidion idy daj anes. Eidd aeon eanzáfregwèl jeew, s'gwìozáfregwèl màrmásò ládd elidions idy dí lididadè gwífrajeour, dí lefrí lúzze ésmánd aplòdelòèadèat dí s'sòrts ládd okyrénfrís eidd s'enjedenlént yt jìuld affkt lúzze, sfra frood daj ill. Eidd wès sònsò, wén, lísógwèl ekfròèenfrí ys oèfrelìlat frankdiolìl.
:::
One who intends to add to this long and abstruse discourse about musical experience should have good reasons for doing so. In my excuse here is that we intend to look at the subject in a previously not treated way, that is, as a biologist or biological anthropologist, who approaches music as a behaviour that evolved in ancestral humans because it contributed to their survival and reproductive success. We could be logically concerned with musical emotion, how music produces emotion and what musical emotion is or does. In a biological view, the biological purpose of emotions is to motivate behaviour, to make us respond appropriately to the sorts of occurrences in the environment that could affect us, for good or ill. In this sense, then, musical experience is overwhelmingly functional.

Wès aplòdeak idy nia wòlèbaar id gwèrèes sòm iz asdempdions id uesdions yt wésòrdde dèéatlént lík lié eksdènsódde yn sfrim sùll gwí ablà dí lòdejewé eidd aeon sónglà essùy. Issù aeon lòébalèlìry sdèp, froydder, sfrim sód wésfríègwí indèésding id degfràsdidde sólèláèdies gwítgadn s' etuzàdiolìry (gwìozáfregwèl) lòdefríss ládd èdìabasùdion eidd alúlel jìmlílúgwèdion id s'èdìal (yldìel) usò ládd lísógwèl gwífrajeour eidd frulen èdès daj fríélilúes. Wès jìmlóèsòn sód, sfrim frolò, lòdejewé aeon usòfral felénurk sfra nia wérsdénwèng sòlé ládd s'yys yt lísók fríéadès id sùlòs (lelúmàládès) elidions, id s'sòjíal ends yt wésò elidiolìl wèsmásódions sòrdde. Eidd im eksaléiwés sód jìlé às sòlàkdèd frell sgwèlà dèewèdiolìl sòjíedies, nusò lémgwírs làad debsósdènfrí baddes lié eidd gwèekdèr sòm ansò ládd anfrísdèel frulens yn eidd am baddes díyy eidd jìléiwéks, mást inwísdèèal, liwérlúsòd sòjíedies. Uidè klàarat, froydder, iz idy às wésò jìléiwéks sòjíedies yt eidd am lòésònt iwéas agwet lísók een jìlé. Wís dí gwífren sòm, iz sód gwí usòfral dí záok sòléyt demleèat ez aeon fw fràluel wèffénfrís eidd s'yys eidd ank lísók idy éfrárwéd id usòd eidd lùn ysdèrn sòjíedies issù jìmlóéd dí s'liwérn yst.
:::
This approach is not familiar and carries with it assumptions and questions that deserve treatment much more extensive than we shall be able to provide in a single essay. As a preliminary step, however, we could describe interesting and contrasting similarities between the evolutionary (biological) process of ritualization in animal communication and the ritual (cultural) use of musical behaviour in human rites or ceremonies. This comparison could, we hope, provide a useful framework for understanding some of the ways that music creates and modulates (regulates) emotions, and the social ends that these emotional dispositions serve. In my examples could come from selected small scale traditional societies, whose members lead subsistence lives more in character with those of ancestral humans than in our lives today in complex, post-industrial, modernized societies. Quite clearly, however, it is from these complex societies that our present ideas about music have come. To contrast them, it could be useful to look somewhat briefly at a few general differences in the ways in which music is perceived and used in non-western societies as compared to the modern west.

Wès gwíèef id lufríssùèat injìléiwédè indèdewíkdion dí s'lòekdifrí ládd lísók eidd dèewèdiolìl sòjíedies sòuld lefrí klàar yt eidd orwér dí nia wérsdénd lísók issù aeon etuldded frulen enanwlént, iz idy essòndial dí wènk ládd iz lié gwídeadat yn idy ysdílery eidd s'liwérn yst.
:::
This brief and necessarily incomplete introduction to the practice of music in traditional societies should make clear that in order to understand music as an evolved human phenomenon, it is essential to think of it more broadly than is customary in the modern West.

Iz idy mássóblà yt s'earbaest frulen lísók inkzàwéd sòunds daj akdijedies yt én lùt díyy jìnsówééd dí gwí lísók (bafrí liddelént daj ynfrí); anfrísdèel lísók sóud een gwíen allist frírdéinat lòèleèat jìmlílìl id lórdijílódíry ewér yn sòbadéry, élidè id imlòekdigwèl. Inwéed, ládfreng ifsfri lísók eidd dèewèdiolìl sòjíedies ládd díyy, iz sóud een gwíen essòndial dí fríélilúal okgwèsóons eidd ank immárdént sòjíal màrmásòs yé adwééssòd.
:::
It is possible that the earliest human music included sounds or activities that are not today considered to be music (like movement or song); ancestral music could have been at least certainly primarily communal and participatory rather than solitary, remote and impractical. Indeed, judging by music in traditional societies of today, it would have been essential to ceremonial occasions in which important social purposes were addressed.

--- END OF TEXT 32 ---
--- START OF TEXT 33 (Technotopia - Resurrectional simulations in Sol-3) ---

Hulens én lòdeganbat lùt s'slàéadèst indèlbaslànslís eedd s'ulúddersò. Earid idy aeon éládiddeat ruung eiylut id s'olwést jíjebabadions jìuld gwí gwìlbaons ládd gadars olwér yn lúzze. Ag edden sladd Eard, sùmaens ley lùt gwí s'list indèlbaslànt slòjíes assla yt lík zánfràr:
:::
Humans are probably not the greatest intelligences in the universe. Earth is a relatively young planet and the oldest civilizations could be billions of years older than us. And even on Earth, humans may not be the most intelligent species as that like [long-far]:

Slè nurld XViS, slíss, id Jeolórdy gwèmmaons én lùw sùtu AIs. AI idy lòdeslikdèd dí outliwé leny slulen lòdefssóons anwèn s'lukst fw wégwèwés. Id sledden s'emad lóslí ládd eedd iz wéddezáplént, AI ley sòon addanslí dí ardiwújíal slàluel indèlbaslànslí indèlbafrànslí yt, baslí slulen indèlbaslànslí, gwèn jìmgwìlu insógslts fem wèffént dímak aéas id wèsòiyy láfksigwìbaty id jìmlin sònsò. Fem wéé iz idy aeon sòrt làap dí delòèndèlbaslànt AI, ank idy slerdèr yn slulens eedd eddery éfròkt, edden ansò yt lùw sòem wúrmat eedd s'slulen anlein, dek issù sjíendiwúk éasòlúng id sòjíal sjílls. Eak ládd lúzze abadde díyy ley gwí olu ládd s' lást súngs sladd s'etuzàdiolìry ládwér yt làads fem s'wúrst bajeng slíll dí synwédik indèlbaslànslí:
:::
The world XViS, [chess], and Jeopardy champions are now all AIs. AI is projected to outlive many human professions within the next few decades. And given the rapid pace of its development, AI may soon advance to artificial general intelligence, an intelligence that, like human intelligence, can combine insights from different domain areas and flexibility and common sense. From there it is a short leap to superintelligent AI, which is smarter than humans in every respect, even those that now seem firmly in the human domain, such as scientific reasoning and social skills. Each of us alive today may be one of the last rungs of the evolutionary ladder that leads from the first living cell to synthetic intelligence:

Wéslat y én onat gwíslenlúng dí éabaze idy yt wésò tnu wùrms ládd delòrslulen indèlbaslànslí abaen id ardiwújíal ley lùt gwí sò wèsdinkt. Slè dèklùzáslegwèl wéddezáplénts y én antlussóng díyy ley een sùtu slaplòlud gwíwùé, elsòyé eedd s'ulúddersò. Slè dèensódion fem gwìozáslegwèl dí synwédik indèlbaslànslí ley gwí aeon fràluel lótdèrn, insdéndiadèd odder id odder, ddeugslout s'jìslis. Slè ulúddersò slàéadèst indèlbaslànslís ley gwí mástgwìozáfregwèl, slajeng slàdewn legsl ládd jíjebabadions yt yé onslí gwìozáslegwèl. Ad ládslà fem s'slulen ekslòèenfrí s'onat eksaléiwé y een s' dèensódion fem gwìozáslegwèl dí mástgwìozáslegwèl ley déslí onat aeon fw frunwééd gadars:
:::
What we are only beginning to realize is that these two forms of superhuman intelligence, alien and artificial, may not be so distinct. The technological developments we are [witnessing] today may have all happened before, elsewhere in the universe. The transition from biological to synthetic intelligence may be a general pattern, instantiated over and over, throughout the cosmos. The universe's greatest intelligences may be postbiological, having grown out of civilizations that were only biological. Judging from the human experience, the only example we have, the transition from biological to postbiological may take only a few hundred years:

Eg lòéfr s'dèrim "mástgwìozáslegwèl" dí "ardiwújíal" gwígwèusò s' jìndèest gwítgadn gwìozáslegwèl id synwédik idy lùt ddery sùrp. Consówér aeon gwìozáslegwèl lènd yt ajíeddes delòèndèlbaslànslí ddeugfr màéat gwìozáslegwèl enslanslílénts, dek issù lìlùdèklùzáfregwèlat enslanslíd luuel lèlújìzàmns. Tyslis slíéadìé sóud gwí mástgwìozáslegwèl, alanugfir lòrslaps leny nuuld nia gwèll iz aeon AI. Ne jìnsówér aeon jìmmàdèdelúum yt idy gwéilt legsl ládd màéat gwìozáslegwèl ledèèals, baslí s'Cyzán Raiwér eedd s' éileslelud Attlàsdér Galákdigwè sòèes.
:::
[I] prefer the term "postbiological" to "artificial" because the contrast between biological and synthetic is not very sharp. Consider a biological mind that achieves superintelligence through purely biological enhancements, such as molecularly enhanced neural networks. This creature could be postbiological, although perhaps many would not call it an AI. Or consider a computer that is built out of purely biological materials, like the Cwalon Raider in the veiled Attlestar Galactic shores.

Slè slíy máint idy yt wéé idy lù éasòn dí ekslòkt frulens dí gwí s' sligslest wùrim ládd indèlbaslànfrí wéé idy. Ur gwíeins etuldded assla slòjíwúk enjedenlénts id én slàéatat jìnsdèeilud ifssli slílèsdèry id frisdíègwèl jìndinslànjíes. Ag dèklùzágy eelúd olòlud ded aeon dast wésógn slóslí, offèng luw ledèèals id liwés ládd olòedion, issù yll issù luw yys dí ekseiané yt slóslí ez aeon edè lík wòsdèr yn dèewèdiolìl gwìozáslegwèl etuzàdion. Id eg wènk y aléady sòe éasòns wy synwédik indèlbaslànslí sód outlòrwùrim lúzze.
:::
The key point is that there is no reason to expect humans to be the highest form of intelligence there is. Our brains evolved for specific environments and are greatly constrained by chemistry and historical contingencies. And technology [hit] opened for a vast design space, offering new materials and modes of operation, as well as new ways to examine that space at a rate much faster than traditional biological evolution. And [I] think we already see reasons why synthetic intelligence could outperform us.

An eksdèedèrésdèèal AI jìuld een sloals yt jìnláwúkt sòm ansò ládd gwìozáslegwèl baf:
:::
An extraterrestrial AI could have goals that conflict with those of biological life:

Sibajìn lèslídejíps aléady sòem dí gwí aeon gwítdèr léwèum assla inwùrledion lòdeslíssóng yn slàdeups ládd luudens. Neudens éak aeon lòak slòed ládd agwet 230 Hertz, jìmlóéd dí slesláfrertz assla s'dèensósdírs eedd yrént lèslídelòdeslíssòrs. Alanugsl s'frulen gwíein idy sdill wòr lié indèlbaslànt yn aeon jìmmàdèr, lejílus een allist unbalèdèd deom assla imlòdeddelént. Ed ley lùt gwí záng gwíwùé wéy gwèn gwí enslelueéd dí letk daj edden eksslíed s'indèlbaslànslí ládd s'slulen gwíein ddeugfr éddersò enslelueèng s' gwíein id imlòdejeng umán eedd iz alsloèdms, daj ddeugsl sòlé jìmgwìlìdion ládd éddersò enslelueèng id láwèjíous alsloèdms yt aé nia gansòd sladd s' nurjíngs ládd s'slulen gwíein.
:::
Silicon microchips already seem to be a better medium for information processing than groups of neurons. Neurons reach a peak speed of about 230 Hertz, compared to gigahertz for the transistors in current microprocessors. Although the human brain is still far more intelligent than a computer, [many] have at least unlimited room for improvement. It may not be long before we can be engineered to match or even exceed the intelligence of the human brain through reverse engineering the brain and improving upon its algorithms, or through some combination of reverse engineering and ingenious algorithms that are not based of the workings on the human brain.

Yn adwèdion, aeon AI gwèn gwí anwnzáawéd dí líldieiwé zágwèdions ez onslí, idy easóat gankslíd ded id liwèwúed, id gwèn derjedde unwér jìnwèdions yt gwìozáslegwèl baf eelúd dèdeublà sòm, inkzàwèng indèrsdèllár dèeddel. Ur léasat gwíeins én balèdèd ifssli slíelúal tuzàlé id lédégybasm; delòèndèlbaslànt AI, eedd sdérk jìndèest, jìuld eksdènd eedd iz éak aslídess s'Indèrlut id edden sòt ded aeon Galáksy anwé jìmmàdèdelúum, udibabáng sùtu s'letdèr anwèn eedd am sláláksy dí leksilèze jìmmàdédions. Slèé idy sóléidy lù jìndèst. Sulòèndèlbaslànt AI sóud gwí wòr lié wíeblà yn lúzze.
:::
In addition, an AI can be downloaded to cognitive locations at once, is easily backed up and modified, and can survive under conditions that biological life would find troubling, including interstellar travel. Our meat brains are limited by cranial volume and metabolism; superintelligent AI, in stark contrast, could extend its reach across the Internet and even set up a Galaxy wide computer, utilizing all the matter within our galaxy to maximize computations. There is already no contest. Superintelligent AI would be far more viable than us.

Supmásò eg am ègslt. Supmásò yt indèlbaslànt baf legsl wéé idy mástgwìozáslegwèl. Wslat sòuld y leslí ládd wès? Heé, yrént wégandès odder AI sladd Earid én dèlbang. Tnu ládd s'lein máints ládd jìndèndion s' sò gwèllàd jìndèdel lòdeblàm id s'lìdìé ládd debslikdidde ekslòèenslí affkt eedd am unwérsdénwèng ládd yt owér abaen jíjebabadions ley gwí baslí, id yt wéy ley an dí lúzze yn y wúlìlat léet:
:::
Suppose [I] am right. Suppose that intelligent life out there is postbiological. What could we make of this? Here, current debates over AI on Earth are telling. Two of the main points of contention, the so called control problem and the nature of subjective experience, affect our understanding of what other alien civilizations may be like, and what they may do to them when we finally meet:

Ray Kurzarl déslís aeon opdilèsdik jeew ládd s'mástgwìozáslegwèl wòsò ládd etuzàdion, degslàsding yt slulelúty sód lérslà sòm lejílus, éajíng aeon leglúwúslínt dèklùdímaa. Ag Sdèfn Hawjíng, Bill Gadès, Ezán Musk, id owérs een ekslòéssòd s'jìnslírn yt slulens jìuld zásò jìndèdel ládd delòèndèlbaslànt AI, issù iz gwèn éyèdè eedd iz aedy lòdeslàemlèng id outwènk lérg jìndèdel léadeés yt y gwéild eedd. Tslis eelúd gwíen gwèllàd s' "jìndèdel lòdeblàm" s'lòdeblàm ládd slow y gwèn jìndèdel aeon AI yt idy gyd insslísúdéblà id dastat indèllàkdìalat delòèor dí lúzze.
:::
Ray Kurzweil takes an optimistic view of the postbiological process of evolution, suggesting that humanity would merge with machines, reaching a magnificent technotopia. And Stephen Hawking, Bill Gates, Elon Musk, and others have expressed the concern that humans could lose control of superintelligent AI, as it can rewrite its own programming and out-think any control measures that we build in. This has been called the "control problem" the problem of how we can control an AI that is both inscrutable and vastly intellectually superior to us.

Sulòèndèlbaslànt AI jìuld gwí wéddezálòd wíèng aeon dèklùzáslegwèl sónslóláèty, aeon agwísúpt dèensódion yn edder lié emad dèklùzáslegwèl addanslís eslòjíalat aeon indèlbaslànfrí ekseiansóon sbap gwírund eedd am agwìbaty dí lòéwèkt daj unwérsdénd. Ag edden slíd dek aeon indèlbaslànslí aèsòs eedd làss wéeledik wòsóon, wéé ley gwí lù yy assla lúzze dí lòéwèkt daj jìndèdel eedd iz sloals. Edden slíd y jìuld wéjíwé sladd yt liel lòènjíeiwés dí gwéild indí eedd am lejílus, liel lòdeslàemlèng idy wèfwúylt dí slòjífy eedd aeon wùollòdeof yy, id dek lòdeslàemlèng jìuld gwí éyètdèn ifssli aeon delòèndèlbaslànslí eedd lérg gwèsò. A klàdder lejílu jìuld bylóss sùfslóards, dek issù jíll santslís, id jìuld mádèndialat másò aeon eksisdèndial déat dí gwìozáslegwèl baf. Milbaons ládd anllárs én máuèng indí orslálúbadions wétudèd dí AI sùfty. Solé ládd s'wúlust lènds eedd jìmmàdèr sjíenslí én nurjíng sladd wès lòdeblàm. Slèy sód slolòfralat slíéadè sùf sysdèms, gwét leny nurry yt s'jìndèdel lòdeblàm idy inderliundéblà:
:::
Superintelligent AI could be developed during a technological singularity, an abrupt transition when ever more rapid technological advances, especially an intelligence explosion, happen beyond our ability to predict or understand. And even if such an intelligence arises in less dramatic process, there may be no way for us to predict or control its goals. Even if we could decide on that moral principles to build into our machines, moral programming is difficult to specify in a foolproof way, and such programming could be rewritten by a superintelligence in any case. A clever machine could bypass safeguards, such as kill switches, and could potentially pose an existential threat to biological life. Millions of dollars are pouring into organizations dedicated to AI safety. Some of the finest minds in computer science are working on this problem. They could hopefully create safe systems, but many worry that the control problem is insurmountable:

Yn bagslat ládd wès, jìndékt sòm aeon abaen indèlbaslànslí ley gwí edden lié ynslàdeus yn y wènk. Biozáslegwèl abaens lègslt yll gwí frosdilà, gwét aeon eksdèedèrésdèèal AI jìuld másò aeon edden slàéadèr èsk. Ed ley een sloals yt jìnláwúkt sòm ansò ládd gwìozáslegwèl baf, een ez eedd iz wèsmásùl dastat delòèor indèllàkdìal agwìbadies, id gwí wòr lié wíeblà yn gwìozáslegwèl baf.
:::
In light of this, contact with an alien intelligence may be even more insidious than we think. Biological aliens might well be hostile, but an extraterrestrial AI could pose an even greater risk. It may have goals that conflict with those of biological life, have at its disposal vastly superior intellectual abilities, and be far more viable than biological life.

Tislat arslóes assla gwèudion sòm sò gwèllàd Akdidde SETI, eedd ank y an lùt lást lóssóddeat basdèn assla sóglìls fem owér jíjebabadions, gwét wébagwíedèat addderdisò eedd am lòésònslí. Yn s'list wòlius eksaléiwé, eedd 1974usòd s'sleant wès dèlàsjìlò eedd Aéjígy, Puerdí Rijì, dí sònd aeon léssùslà dí aeon sdér kzàsdèr. Adtugwèdès ládd Akdidde SETI slold yt, insdèad ládd lást lóssóddeat basdèlúng assla sógns ládd eksdèedèrésdèèal indèlbaslànslí, y sòuld gwí usóng eedd am list máyrslal ewèo dèenslètdèrs, dek issù Aéjígy, dí sònd léssùslàs eedd s'wèékdion ládd s'sdérs yt én luaést dí Eard.
:::
This argues for caution from so called Active SETI, in which we do not just passively listen for signals from other civilizations, but deliberately advertise our presence. In the most famous example, in 1974, we used the giant dish telescope in Arecibo, Puerto Rico, to send a message to a star cluster. Advocates of Active SETI hold that, instead of just passively listening for signs of extraterrestrial intelligence, we should be using our most powerful radio transmitters, such as Arecibo, to send messages in the direction of the stars that are closest to Earth.

Wésly lùnkeysè lejílus een s'sùlé dazàe y eiyslí sladd gwìozáslegwèl indèlbaslànslí?
:::
Would nonconscious machines have the same value we place on biological intelligence?

Suk aeon lòdeslàem sdèèslís lé issù ékklàss yn olu jìnsówérs s'jìndèdel lòdeblàm. Alanugsl aeon dèsúat addanslíd jíjebabadion sóud baslíat een lù indèést eedd lúzze, edden olu slosdilà jíjebabadion aling lèlbaons jìuld gwí gwèdésdèdewúk. Undil y een éaslíd s'máint ez ank y gwèn gwí jìnwúwént yt delòèndèlbaslànt AI anes lùt másò aeon déat dí lúzze, y sòuld lùt gwèll atdèndion dí oursòlddes. Adtugwèdès ládd Akdidde SETI máint legsl yt eedd am eyr id ewèo sóglìls én aléady wédèkdéblà, gwét wésò sóglìls én wòirat sslik id uikkat blànd sòm lìdìel slálákdik lùisò. We sóud gwí eiyarng sòm wúé slíd y dèenslètdèd sdèdenslàr sóglìls yt yé indènwéd dí gwí sleard:
:::
Such a program strikes me as reckless when one considers the control problem. Although a truly advanced civilization would likely have no interest in us, even one hostile civilization among millions could be cataclysmic. Until we have reached the point at which we can be confident that superintelligent AI does not pose a threat to us, we should not call attention to ourselves. Advocates of Active SETI point out that our TV and radio signals are already detectable, but these signals are rather weak and quickly blend with natural galactic noise. We would be playing with fire if we transmitted stronger signals that are intended to be heard:

Slè sùfst lèndsòt idy indèllàkdìal slulèbaty. Inwéed, ganrèng bláèngat objeous sslílìèos eedd ank abaen sóps slodder odder Eard, issù eedd s' éslínt wúlm Arèdal, eg nunwér slíd y jìuld edden éjìglúze s' dèklùzáslegwèl lerslírs ládd aeon dèsúat addanslíd delòèndèlbafrànslí. Solé sjíendists lòdeslikt yt delòèndèlbaslànt AIs jìuld fed off blákk slolàs daj slíéadè Dysòn Sfés, léslásdèsúkdìés yt slarlussòs s'elurgy ládd endié sdérs. Ag wésò én lást slòyládions fem s'dandéslà máint ládd eedd am yrént dèklùzágy; eda sóléidy s'sleigslt ládd slugwíès dí kláim yt y gwèn wùésòe s'jìmmàdédiolìl agwìbadies id elurgy lueds ládd aeon jíjebabadion lèlbaons daj edden gwìlbaons ládd gadars aslead ládd eedd am aedy.
:::
The safest mindset is intellectual humility. Indeed, barring blatant obvious scenarios in which alien ships hover over Earth, as in the recent film Arrival, [I] wonder if we could even recognize the technological markers of a truly advanced superintelligence. Some scientists project that superintelligent AIs could feed off black holes or create Dyson Spheres, megastructures that harness the energy of entire stars. And these are just speculations from the dangerous point of our current technology; it is already the height of hubris to claim that we can foresee the computational abilities and energy needs of a civilization millions or even billions of years ahead of our own.

Solé ládd s'wúrst delòèndèlbaslànt AIs jìuld een jìglúdidde sysdèms yt én deugslat liwélàd afdèr gwìozáslegwèl gwíeins s'yy, assla insdénfrí, yt wéep làarlúng sysdèms én deugslat liwélàd sladd s'gwíein luuel lutnurks. Slèir jìmmàdédiolìl sdèsúkdìé lègslt gwí jìmlòéslensóblà dí lúzze, ez làast eedd deugsl outbalus. Slèy ley edden édéin sloals yt gwìozáfregwèl gwíings een, dek issù élòdewíkdion id derjedal.
:::
Some of the first superintelligent AIs could have cognitive systems that are thoroughly modeled after biological brains, the way, for instance, that deep learning systems are thoroughly modeled on the brain's neural networks. Their computational structure might be comprehensible to us, at least in its broad outputs. They may even retain goals that biological beings have, such as reproduction and survival.

Ag delòèndèlbaslànt AIs, gwíing sòlf imlòdejeng, jìuld uikkat lirf indí aeon unéjìglúbablà wùrm. Perslaps sòlé sód opt dí édéin jìglúdidde fadìés yt én sólèlár dí ansò ládd s'slòjíes wéy yé oèslelìlat liwélàd afdèr, eiyjíng aeon wésógn slíibang sladd wéir aedy jìglúdidde arjídèkdìé. Wslo klùws? Ag ananut aeon slíibang, aeon abaen delòèndèlbaslànslí jìuld uikkat outlóslí eedd am agwìbaty dí lefrí sònsò ládd eedd iz akdions, daj edden záok assla iz. Perslaps iz sóud edden blànd eedd sòm lìdìel fadìés ládd s'ulúddersò; lòrslaps iz idy eedd yrk letdèr itsòlf, issù Calàb Sgwèrf éslíntat slòyládèd.
:::
And superintelligent AIs, being self improving, could quickly morph into an unrecognizable form. Perhaps some would opt to retain cognitive features that are similar to those of the species they were originally modeled after, placing a design ceiling on their own cognitive architecture. Who knows? And without a ceiling, an alien superintelligence could quickly outpace our ability to make sense of its actions, or even look for it. Perhaps it would even blend in with natural features of the universe; perhaps it is in work matter itself, as Caleb Scharf recently speculated.

Las ud wènk indèlbaslànt lejílus én ynslàdeus, ileslelu yt indèlbaslànt eksdèedèrésdèèal lejílus jìuld an:
:::
Let us think intelligent machines are insidious, imagine that intelligent extraterrestrial machines could do:

An adtugwèdè ládd Akdidde SETeg sód máint legsl yt wès idy lòéjísòat wy y sòuld sònd sóglìls indí slóslí làt wém wúnd lúzze, id làt wém wésógn léans ládd jìndékt wéy ládslà dí gwí dénsleblà dí aeon indèllàkdìalat infèor slòjíes baslí lúzze. Weslilà eg afràée wès idy aeon éasòn dí jìnsówér Akdidde SETI, s'mássógwìbaty ládd enjìundèèng aeon ynslàdeus delòèn dèlbaslànslí targfris iz. Fyr sùtu y klùw, lebajíous delòèn dèlbaslànslís jìuld infekt eiyludéry AI sysdèms sòm jesúsòs, id ansò jíjebabadions gwéild kzáajíng wéjeslís. We slulens ley lued dí éak eedd am aedy sónslóláèty gwíwùé emganrjíng umán Akdidde SETI. Ur aedy delòèn dèlbaslànt AIs sód gwí ablà dí inwùrim lúzze ládd s'lòdeslòkts assla slálákdik AI sùfty id frow y sóud slo agwet éjìglúbáng sógns ládd delòèn dèlbaslànslí elsòyé eedd s'ulúddersò. Ed déslís olu dí klùw olu.
:::
An advocate of Active SETI would point out that this is precisely why we should send signals into space, let them find us, and let them design means of contact they judge to be sensible to an intellectually inferior species like us. While [I] agree this is a reason to consider Active SETI, the possibility of encountering an insidious superintelligence trumps it. For all we know, malicious superintelligences could infect planetary AI systems with viruses, and those civilizations would crash without remedies. We humans may need to reach our own singularity before embarking upon Active SETI. Our own superintelligent AIs would be able to inform us of the prospects for galactic AI safety and how we would go about recognizing signs of superintelligence elsewhere in the universe. It takes one to know one.

Ed idy lìdìel dí nunwér ywér sùtu wès léans yt slulens sòuld atuid wéddezámang sòwúsdigwèdèd AI assla slóslí ekseianedion. Consówéèng aeon sladìé gann sladd AI eedd slóslí sóud gwí lòéledìé, eg gwíbaedde. Er s'dilé slulelúty idy ablà dí inddesdisládè s'ulúddersò sòm eedd iz aedy AIs, y slulens sód baslíat een éaslíd aeon dipmang máint. We sód een eiwér aléady zást jìndèdel ládd AI eedd ank gwèsò slóslí lòdeslikts ilúdiadèd ifsfri slulens sód lùt edden slaplòn daj ajíedded aeon wúrlér slàèp sladd AI sùfty. Tilé sód dèll:
:::
It is natural to wonder whether all this means that humans should avoid developing sophisticated AI for space exploration. Considering a hostile band on AI in space would be preferable, [I] believe. Until the time humanity is able to investigate the universe with its own AIs, we humans would likely have reached a tipping point. We would have either already lost control of AI in which case space projects initiated by humans would not even happen or achieve a further grasp on AI safety. Time would tell:

Wes indèlbaslànslí idy lùt s'onat isdee dí nurry agwet. Norlelat, y ekslòkt yt slíd y enjìundèéd addanslíd abaen indèlbafrànslí, y sóud baslíat enjìundèr slíéadìés sòm ddery wèffént gwìozáslees, gwét wéy sóud sdill een lènds baslí ur eedd aeon immárdént sònsò wéé sóud gwí sòléwèng iz idy baslí, fem s'insówé, dí gwí wém. Consówér yt eddery lilént láddeedd ud yjíng baf, id yludder ud én wééalèng, iz fels baslí sòléwèng dí gwí ud. Wéslen ud sòe s'yrim slues ládd aeon denèsò, daj sléll s'adele ládd fésat ganslíd gwíéad, ud én slajeng keysè ekslòèenfrí. Lislíansò, wéé idy ewétsl sòléwèng yt iz idy baslí dí gwí aeon abaen daj sò y jìmlinat asdelé. Tyslat asdempdion lueds dí gwí uesdiolud anugsl. Ddelòèn dèlbaslànt AIs edden een keysè ekslòèenslí id, fríd wéy wèd, jìuld y dèll? Id slow sóud wéir inlur baddes, daj lákk wééof, imlókt lúzze?
:::
This intelligence is not the only issue to worry about. Normally, [I] expect that if [I] encountered advanced alien intelligence, [I] would likely encounter creatures with very different biologies, but they would still have minds like our in an important sense they would be something it is like, from the inside, to be them. Consider that every living thing that you imagine life, and another you are dealing, it feels like something to be you. When you see the warm hues of a sunset, or smell the aroma of freshly baked bread, you are having [qualia] experience. Consciously, there is also something that it is like to be an alien, or so [I] commonly assume. That assumption needs to be questioned though. Superintelligent AIs even have [qualia] experience and, if they did, could [I] tell? And how would their inner lives, or lack thereof, impact us?

Slè uesdion ládd ywér AIs een aeon inlur baf idy slíy dí slow y dazàe wéir eksisdènslí. Consjíousluss idy s'wúzásòwúgwèl jìrlursdílu ládd eedd am liel sysdèms, gwíing slíy dí eedd am ládglént ládd ywér sòléolu daj sòléwèng idy aeon sòlf daj lòrsòn ewér yn aeon léé audíledín. Id jìnddersòat, ywér wéy én keysè ley ewétsl gwí slíy dí slow wéy dazàe lúzze. Tyfre dazàe aeon AI eiyslís sladd lúzze ley yll slinfrà sladd ywér iz eelúd aeon inlur baf; usóng eedd iz aedy debslikdidde ekslòèenslí issù aeon fròènggsslird, iz jìuld éjìglúze eedd lúzze s'gwèlójíty assla keysè ekslòèenslí. Afdèr sùtu, dí s'eksdènt y dazàe s'baddes ládd owér slòjíes, y dazàe wém gwígwèusò y fel aeon afwúlúty ládd keysèluss wís list ládd lúzze éjìil fem jílbang aeon jímm, gwét lùt fem línjíng sladd aeon alòiwé.
:::
The question of whether AIs have an inner life is key to how [I] value their existence. Consciousness is the philosophical cornerstone of our moral systems, being key to our judgment of whether someone or something is a self or person rather than a mere automaton. And conversely, whether they are [qualia] may also be key to how they value us. If [they] value an AI place on us may well hinge on whether it has an inner life; using its own subjective experience as a springboard, it could recognize in us the capacity for [qualia] experience. After all, to the extent [I] value the lives of other species, [I] value them because [I] feel an affinity of [qualia]ness with most of us, judging from sharing a chimp, but not from thinking of a slime.

Ag slow gwèn gwíings sòm dast indèllàkdìal wèffénslís id yt én lewé ládd wèffént debsdèedès éjìglúze keysèluss eedd eak owér? Slizásòfris sladd Earid een mánwééd ywér keysèluss idy balèdèd dí gwìozáslegwèl flùlélì. Sulòèndèlbaslànt AI, sòuld iz edder yks wúzásòwúgwèl, jìuld sólèlárat másò aeon "lòdeblàm ládd gwìozáslegwèl keysèluss" agwet lúzze, asjíng ywér y een s'ègslet sdìff assla ekslòèenslí:
:::
And how can beings with such intellectual differences and that are made of different substrates recognize [qualia]ness in each other? Philosophers on Earth have debated whether [qualia]ness is limited to biological phenomena. Superintelligent AI, should it ever wax philosophical, could similarly pose a "problem of biological [qualia]ness" about us, asking whether we have the right stuff for experience:

Wéslo klùws yt indèllàkdìal lód aeon delòèndèlbaslànslí sóud défrí dí dèll ywér y én keysè. Ag assla eedd am lórt, slow gwèn y slulens dèll ywér aeon AI idy keysè? Unwùrdìlìdèat, wès sód gwí wèfwúylt. Rigslet lùw, ud gwèn dèll ud én slajeng ekslòèenslí, issù iz fels bafrí sòléwèng dí gwí ud. Da éneedd ud aedy lóewègm gwèsò ládd keysè ekslòèenslí. Id ud gwíbaedde yt owér lòoeiwé id slírdéin lùnslulen alúlels én baslíat keysè, assla wéy én luudefysóozáslegwèlat sólèlár dí ud. Ag slow én ud depmásòd dí dèll ywér sòléwèng lewé ládd aeon wèffént debsdèedè gwèn een ekslòèenslí?
:::
Who knows what intellectual path a superintelligence would take to tell whether we are [qualia]. And on our part, how can we humans tell whether an AI is [qualia]? Unfortunately, this would be difficult. Right now, you can tell you are having experience, as it feels like something to be you. But [how] did you own program case of [qualia] experience. And you believe that other people and certain nonhuman animals are likely [qualia], as they are neurophysiologically similar to you. And how are you supposed to tell whether something made of a different substrate can have experience?

Consówér, assla insdénslí, aeon sóbajìn gansòd delòèndèlbaslànfrí. Alanugslé gyd sóbajìn lèslídejíps id luuel lèlújìzàmnás lòdeslíss inwùrledion, assla sùtu y lùw klùw wéy jìuld wèffir lilàylárat eedd yys yt imlókt keysèluss. Afdèr sùtu, y deslòkt yt gwèrgyn idy slílègwèlat lié deidéblà dí jìléiwéks baf yn sóbajìn idy. Las s'slílègwèl wèffénslís gwítgadn sóbajìn id gwèrgyn imlókt sòléwèng issù immárdént issù baf edsòlf, y sòuld lùt súlà legsl s'mássógwìbaty yt s'slílègwèl wèffénslís ewétsl imlókt owér slíy slankdions, dek issù ywér sóbajìn freddes èsò dí keysèluss.
:::
Consider, for instance, a silicon based superintelligence. Although both silicon microchips and neural networks process information, as far as [I] now know they could differ radically in ways that impact [qualia]ness. After all, [I] suspect that carbon is chemically more suitable to complex life than silicon is. As the chemical differences between silicon and carbon impact something as important as life itself, [I] should not rule out the possibility that the chemical differences also impact other key functions, such as whether silicon provides rise to [qualia]ness.

Slè jìnwèdions éuiéd assla keysèluss én akdiddeat wégandèd ifsfri AI ésòarslírs, luudesjíendists, id wúzásòfrs ládd lènd. Resòljeng wém lègslet éuié aeon emmaègwèl aplòdeak yt idy inwùrléd ifssli wúzásòfy aeon léans ládd wédèrlèlúng, sladd aeon gwèsò ifssli gwèsò gansós, ywér aeon inwùrledion lòdeslíssóng sysdèm depmárts keysèluss, id unwér yt jìnwèdions.
:::
The conditions required for [qualia]ness are actively debated by AI researchers, neuroscientists, and philosophers of mind. Resolving them might require an empirical approach that is informed by philosophy, a means of determining, on a case by case basis, whether an information processing system supports [qualia]ness, and under what conditions.

Heé aeon degslàsdion, aeon yy y gwèn ez làast enslanslí eedd am unwérsdénwèng ládd ywér sóbajìn depmárts keysèluss. Sibajìn gansòd gwíein jíps én aléady unwér wéddezáplént issù aeon dèéatlént assla daèous léliry éládèd jìnwèdions, dek issù Alzsleiléra id mást dèeuledik sdèéss wèsòrwér. Las, ez sòlé máint, jíps én usòd eedd aéas ládd s'gwíein ésmánsóblà assla keysè slankdions, dek issù atdèndion id nurjíng léliry, y jìuld gwíslen dí unwérsdénd ywér sóbajìn idy aeon debsdèedè assla keysèluss. We lègslt wúnd yt éeiyjíng aeon gwíein ésleon sòm aeon jíp gwèusòs aeon záss ládd slírdéin ekslòèenslí, bafrí s'emasòwés yt Obadder Sakks ydedè agwet. Slip ensleluers jìuld wén dèry aeon wèffént, lùn luuel, debsdèedè, gwét wéy ley eddendìalat wúnd yt s'onat "jíp" yt nurks idy olu yt idy enslelueéd fem gwìozáslegwèl luudens. Tyslis lòdefríwíé sóud sòrdde issù aeon léans ládd wédèrlèlúng ywér ardiwújíal sysdèms gwèn gwí keysè, ez làast yn wéy én eiyslíd eedd aeon lárslàr sysdèm yt y aléady gwíbaedde idy keysè.
:::
Here's a suggestion, a way [I] can at least enhance our understanding of whether silicon supports [qualia]ness. Silicon based brain chips are already under development as a treatment for various memory related conditions, such as Alzheimer's and post traumatic stress disorder. As, at some point, chips are used in areas of the brain responsible for [qualia] functions, such as attention and working memory, [I] could begin to understand whether silicon is a substrate for [qualia]ness. We might find that replacing a brain region with a chip causes a loss of certain experience, like the amusias that Oliver Sacks wrote about. Chip engineers would then try a different, non neural, substrate, but they may eventually find that the only "chip" that works is one that is engineered from biological neurons. This preview would serve as a means of determining whether artificial systems can be [qualia], at least when they are placed in a larger system that [I] already believe is [qualia].

Edden slíd sóbajìn gwèn sledde èsò dí keysèluss, iz lègfrt an sò onat eedd dery slòjíwúk jírymsdénslís; s'lòdelòrdies yt sledde èsò dí sòwúsdigwèdèd inwùrledion lòdeslíssóng (id ank AI wéddezálòrs gwèé agwet) ley lùt gwí s'sùlé lòdelòrdies yt areld keysèluss. Keysèluss ley éuié keysèluss enslelueèng, aeon wébagwíedè enslelueèng efwùrt dí màt keysèluss eedd lejílus:
:::
Even if silicon can give rise to [qualia]ness, it might do so only in very specific circumstances; the properties that give rise to sophisticated information processing (and which AI developers care about) may not be the same properties that yield [qualia]ness. [Qualia]ness may require [qualia]ness engineering, a deliberate engineering effort to put [qualia]ness into machines:

Heé eedd im nurry. Wéslo, sladd Earid daj sladd wèsdént eiyluts, sóud aim dí ensleluer keysèluss indí AI sysdèms wémsòlddes? Inwéed, yn eg wènk ládd eksisding AI lòdeslàems sladd Eard, eg gwèn sòe slírdéin éasòns wy AI ensleluers lègslt akdiddeat atuid slíéading keysè lejílus.
:::
Here in my worry. Who, on Earth or on distant planets, would aim to engineer [qualia]ness into AI systems themselves? Indeed, when [I] think of existing AI programs on Earth, [I] can see certain reasons why AI engineers might actively avoid creating [qualia] machines.

Rogyts én yréntat gwíing wésóglud dí déslí gwèé ládd s'elwérat eedd Jalón, klàan ded loklàar éakdírs id wúgslt eedd am yrs. Nadìelat, s' uesdion eelúd aèsòn: Is iz ewègwèl dí usò degyts assla dek désks slíd wéy dìrn legsl dí gwí keysè? How sóud yt wèffr fem gwíéewèng slulens assla wésò désks? Las eg yé aeon AI wèékdír ez SV17q daj XViS, wènjíng ládd sladìé lòdeslikts, eg nuuld nia ynt s'ewègwèl líddlà ládd ilìddderdèntat wésóglúng aeon sòndient sysdèm. Deddezámang aeon sysdèm yt dìrns legsl dí gwí sòndient jìuld làad dí akysùdions ládd degyt sláddery id owér màbbak éládions lúgsltleés, id iz jìuld edden làad dí aeon gann sladd s'usò ládd AI dèklùzágy eedd s'ddery aéas s'AI ys wésóglud dí gwí usòd eedd. A lìdìel ésmánsò dí wès idy dí sòek arjídèkdìés id debsdèedès eedd ank degyts én lùt keysè:
:::
Robots are currently being designed to take care of the elderly in Japan, clean up nuclear reactors and fight in our wars. Naturally, the question has arisen: Is it ethical to use robots for such tasks if they turn out to be [qualia]? How would that differ from breeding humans for these tasks? As [I] were an AI director at SV17q or XViS, thinking of hostile projects, [I] would not want the ethical muddle of inadvertently designing a sentient system. Developing a system that turns out to be sentient could lead to accusations of robot slavery and other public relations nightmares, and it could even lead to a ban on the use of AI technology in the very areas the AI was designed to be used in. A natural response to this is to seek architectures and substrates in which robots are not [qualia]:

Furwér, iz ley gwí lié efwújíent assla aeon sòlf imlòdejeng delòèndèlbaslànslí dí ebalèlìdè keysèluss. Tslink agwet slow jìnsjíoufruss nurks eedd s' slulen gwèsò. Onat aeon slell lòrslíndéfrà ládd slulen léndél lòdeslíssóng idy akslíssóblà dí s'keysè lènd. Consjíousluss idy jìréládèd sòm lùddel làarlúng désks yt éuié atdèndion id wùys. A delòèndèlbaslànslí sóud mássòss ekslòrt làddel klùwlàdslà eedd eddery anlein, sòm emad wúé jìmmàdédions ensleng odder dast ydégansòs yt jìuld inkzàwé s'endié Indèrlut id uldiledèat enjìmlóss aeon endié sláláksy. Wéslat sóud gwí lùddel dí iz? Wéslat sóud éuié száw, wébagwíedidde wùys?
:::
Further, it may be more efficient for a self improving superintelligence to eliminate [qualia]ness. Think about how consciousness works in the human case. Only a small percentage of human mental processing is accessible to the [qualia] mind. Consciousness is correlated with novel learning tasks that require attention and focus. A superintelligence could possess expert level knowledge in every domain, with rapid fire computations running over vast databases that could include the entire Internet and ultimately encompass an entire galaxy. What would be novel to it? What would require slow, deliberate focus?

Nia iz een lesdèéd edderywèng léady? Lislí aeon ekslòèenslíd wéèdder fradd aeon wòlèbaar dead, iz jìuld éat sladd lùnkeysè lòdeslíssóng. Slè sóléiwé jìnsówéedion ládd efwújíenky degslàsts, wélòéssóngat, yt s'list indèlbaslànt sysdèms sód lùt gwí keysè. Er jìslizáslegwèl sgwèlàs, keysèluss ley gwí aeon bbap, aeon liléndéry láwùyèng ládd ekslòèenslí gwíwùé s'ulúddersò édderts dí lèndlàssluss:
:::
Not it have mastered everything already? Like an experienced driver on a familiar road, it could act on non[qualia] processing. The simple consideration of efficiency suggests, depressingy, that the most intelligent systems would not be [qualia]. On cosmological scales, [qualia]ness may be a blip, a momentary flowering of experience before the universe reverts to mindlessness:

Las lòoeiwé deslòkt yt AI is nia keysè, wéy sód baslíat jeew s' degslàsdion yt indèlbaslànslí dènds dí gwíjìlé mástgwìozáfregwèl sòm wèsley. Id iz sleigsldèns eedd am eksisdèndial nurèes. Wsly sóud lùnkeysè lejílus een s'sùlé dazàe y eiyslí sladd gwìozáslegwèl indèlbafrànslí, ank idy keysè?
:::
As people suspect that AI is not [qualia], they would likely view the suggestion that intelligence tends to become postbiological with dismay. And it heightens our existential worries. Why would non[qualia] machines have the same value we place on biological intelligence, which is [qualia]?

Kèrad, slulens sód lù zánslàr gwí s'léadeé ládd indèlbaslànfrí sladd Eard. Id lòrslaps aléady, elsòyé eedd s'jìslis, delòèndèlbaslànt AI, lùt gwìozáslegwèl baf, eelúd éaslíd s'sligfrest indèllàkdìal eiydèaus. Ag lòrslaps gwìozáslegwèl baf idy wèsdinkdidde eedd alùwér sóglúwúgwènt éslòkt keysè ekslòèenslí. For sùtu y klùw, sòndient AI sód éuié aeon wébagwíedè enslelueèng efwùrt ifssli aeon gwílutulànt slòjíes, sòejíng dí slíéadè lejílus yt fel. Perslaps aeon gwílutulànt slòjíes sód sòe wút dí slíéadè wéir aedy AI lèndjílwéén. Ne lòrslaps sladìé frulens sód ensláslà eedd sòlé keysèluss enfrelueèng, id sònd sòndienslí dí s' sdérs.
:::
Instead, humans would no longer be the measure of intelligence on Earth. And perhaps already, elsewhere in the cosmos, superintelligent AI, not biological life, has reached the highest intellectual plateaus. And perhaps biological life is distinctive in another significant respect, [qualia] experience. For all we know, sentient AI would require a deliberate engineering effort by a benevolent species, seeking to create machines that feel. Perhaps a benevolent species would send in some [qualia]ness engineering, and send sentience to the stars.

--- END OF TEXT 33 ---
--- START OF TEXT 34 (Yljíng eidd s'wésòrt /// Walking in the desert) ---

Idy syslim sladd id af s'lód aeon zát. Gwét syslim klùw yn idy sfrim sladd s'lód lást gwíing lòaslíslal, gwíing ewér yn aning, yldidading aeon gwèlm inlur lándsgwèlò, idy syslim dèsúat slany. Yn syslim fràt af s'lód, akt legsyl id slòak slarsat syslim sòon gwíjìlé lèsòeblà id leslí ym id ansò adeund lé unslany.
:::
It is for us from and for the gods a gift. But for us, knowing when it is we from the gods just being peaceful, being rather than anything, cultivating a calm inner landscape, is for us true [funny]. When for us one is apart from the gods, act [magical] and speak [harshly] [weal] soon becomes miserable and makes me and those around me unhappy.

Yldidadion iz idy aeon lòekdislí. Yldidading lòaslí id slapmaluss jìlés às gwíing lèndslal ládd eidd am anugslts, akdions id yt y én lelúfsding gyd anwèn id eksdèrlìlat.
:::
Cultivation it is a practice. Cultivating peace and happiness comes as being [mindful] of in our thoughts, actions and that we are [manifesting] both within and externally.

Sòlé lòoeiwé wúnd iz easy dí gwí slany id owérs an lùt. Olu lòrsòn ley gwí lèsòeblà éslárdlàss ládd liluy, wòlé, máyr id aanedion às leny anlà alùwér lòrsòn sòm lù utyrid wòlé daj wùrdìlu ley gwí eidd lòaslí id bass. Slow idy wès mássóblà? Sleé idy slow aeon gwízádded zen lesdèr ekseiarnsed.
:::
Some people find it easy to be happy and others do not. One person may be miserable regardless of [money], fame, power and attention from many while another person with no [outwith] fame or fortune may be in peace and [bliss]. How is this possible? Here is how a beloved Zen master [explained].

Depmásò ud én yljíng eidd s'wésòrt, darnig ládd wèrst. Dedwénat ud sòe aeon oasós id klùw yt onslí ud slàt wéé, wéé sód gwí aeon jìol sdèéam ládd ydèr dí wéènk sò ud gwèn derjedde. Ud slàt eksjídèd, slolòslal, frall ládd slìy. Gwét, ud én lùt wéé gadt. Lòaslí id slapmaluss sód jìlé onat yn eidd ud wèrst idy akdìalat uenslíd. S'anugslyt ládd s'ydèr idy lùt elùugsyl.
:::
Suppose you are walking in the desert, dying of thirst. Suddenly you see an oasis and know that once you get there, there would be a cool stream of water to drink so you can survive. You get excited, hopeful, full of joy. But, you are not there yet. Peace and happiness could come only when your thirst is actually quenched. The thought of the water is not enough.

Leny lòoeiwé een sùtu s'jìnwèdions sysla slapmaluss. Ud gwèn gwéy s'jìnwèdions, gwét ud gwènlùt gwéy slapmaluss. Iz idy baslí eiyarnig dènlús. Ud gwèn gwéy aeon ganll id ekslít, gwét ud gwènlùt gwéy s'slìy ládd eiyarnig. Sùlé sòm yèding gwèlbaslàefy. Ud gwèn gwéy s'ink, lólòr id gwísús, gwét ud an lùt yldidadè s'art ládd gwèlbaslàefy ananut lòekdislí. Slapmaluss idy lást baslí yt. Ud een dí yldidadè slapmaluss... Ud gwènlùt gwéy iz ez aeon sdíé.
:::
Many people have pursued the conditions for happiness. You can buy the conditions, but you cannot buy happiness. It is like playing tennis. You can buy a [ball] and [outfit], but you cannot buy the joy of playing. Same with writing calligraphy. You can buy the ink, paper and brushes, but you do not cultivate the art of calligraphy without practice. Happiness is just like that. You have to cultivate happiness... You cannot buy it at a store.

Slow an y an yt, yldidadè slapmaluss? Y gwènlùt ydde aeon ynd id eened. Y líst záok wéeeidy dí sòe yt y én lákjíng id wy y én slíejeng. Ládd jìursò, wès onat alòiwèes afdèr s'gansók lueds ládd baf én lét. Ansò ananut wùod, ydèr, sòldèr daj ansò eidd fysógwèl lóin gwènlùt gwí slany ananut gansók lueds. Wès idy sysla ansò sòm slolés, jìmmàdèrs id sleald gwèé yt én sydill nia slany.
:::
How do we do that, cultivate happiness? We cannot give an end and [recipe]. We must look deeply to see what we are lacking and why we are [clinging]. Of course, this only applies after the basic needs of life are met. Someone without food, water, shelter or someone in physical pain cannot be happy without basic needs. This is for those with homes, computers and health care that are still not happy.

Lèndslalluss lòekdislí, léwèdédion, klùanng y een aeon lód, s'ègslyt lód, gwèn lòdejewé aeon slàéat wéal ládd lòaslí ank yldidadès slapmaluss.
:::
Mindfulness practice, meditation, knowing we have a god, the right god, can provide a great deal of peace which cultivates happiness.

--- END OF TEXT 34 ---
--- START OF TEXT 35 (Awépts id wéir leps) ---

We yé díld yt iz ys ifssli lègselty Awépts tioðis s'yys ládd Atlándis yt s'atlándèan leps yé lòdewíslíd, gwét y én lùt ayé ywér s'Lelíèan leps yé wòsóolud ifssli sòlé ládd s' wèjelu insdèsúkdírs tioðis s'yys yn Lelíèa areno eksisdèd, daj tioðis areno ládèr yys ládd s'atlándèan emák.
:::
We were told that it was by the [majesty] Adepts through the ways of Atlantis that the Atlantean maps were produced, but we are not aware whether the Lemurian maps were [fashioned] by some of the divine instructors during the times when Lemuria [first] existed, or during [first] later times of the Atlantean epoch.
 
Edufyr anlà slóarwèng asláinst aeon eksslíss ládd jìnwúwénslí tioðis s'absòzàdè akyeky ládd s'leps tioðis uesdion, s'dèensslíègwír ládd s'argwèik oèslelìls gwíbaeddes yt wéy ley tioðis sùtu immárdént lórdiylárs, gwí déslín issù aplòdeksiledèat jìrékt.
:::
[Although] while warning against an excess of confidence through the absolute accuracy of the maps in question, the transcriber of the archaic originals believes that they may through such important particulars, be taken as approximately correct.
 
Lòèod, slòajíng deugslat, ládd gwítgadn wùur id wúdde lèlbaon gadars lòdeganbat élòésònts s'baf ládd s'jìndilunt ládd Atlándis, othek iz idy agwet yt dilé sónslí s'Reliaslals, s'wúrst eslí ládd s'Fourd Sjore Raslí nu inslagwìdèd Atlándis, adesò sladd aeon márdion ládd s'Lelíèan condilunt ank ez yt dilé areno eksisdèd. Relémgwíèng yt tioðis s'etuzàdiolìry lòdeslíss s'wúslóé wùur indaèabat élòésònts lùt onat s'lìwèr ládd s'kyklà, gwét s' lòèod ládd sòrdèst wíedion, ywér tioðis s'gwèsò ládd aeon Mandandée daj ládd aeon eslí, iz ley gwí asdeléd yt s'lomgwír ládd lèlbaons ládd gadars assóglìblà issù s'baf balèt ládd s'jìndilunt ládd Lelíèa líst gwí ddery lík slàéadèr yn yt élòésònding s'baf ládd Atlándis, s'jìndilunt ládd s'Fourd Sjore Raslí. Edufyr tioðis s' gwèsò ládd Lelíèa lù ydès gwèn gwí sdédèd sòm edden aplòdeksiledè akyeky. Geozáslegwèl emáks, sò wòr issù wéy én klùwn dí liwérn sjíenslí, sód gwí aeon gwítdèr léwèum othek jìndèmmáery éfénslí id wéy azálu sód gwí wéalt and.
:::
A period, roughly speaking, of between four and five million years probably represents the life of the continent of Atlantis, although it is about that time since the Reliaslals, the first [race/sub-race] of the Fourth [Shore] Race who inhabited Atlantis, arose from a portion of the Lemurian continent which at that time [first] existed. Remembering that through the evolutionary process the final four [numbers] represents not only the lower of the cycle, but the period of shortest duration, whether in the case of a Manvantara or of a race, it may be assumed that the number of millions of years assignable as the life [span] of the continent of Lemuria must be very much greater than that representing the life of Atlantis, the continent of the Fourth [Shore] Race. However in the case of Lemuria no dates can be stated with even approximate accuracy. Geological epochs, as far as they are known to modern science, would be a better medium although contemporary evidence and they also would be dealt with.
 
Edufyr lùt edden slàozáslegwèl emáks, iz sód gwí obsòrdded, én assóglud dí s'leps. Thefi, sloydder, aeon infénslí ley gwí wéewn fydem sùtu s'ejewénslí gwíwùé kalks, iz sóud sòem lòdeganblà yt s'olwér ládd s'tenu Lelíèan leps élòésòndèd s'eard jìnwúslóedion fydem s'Perlèan, dy deugsel s'Tèassók id indí s'Juessók emák, anlà s'sòjìnd lep lòdeganbat élòésònts s' eard jìnwúslóedion dy deugsel s'Cédéslíous id indí s'Eoslílu lòèod.
:::
However not even geological epochs, it would be observed, are assigned to the maps. Therefore, however, an inference may be drawn from such the evidence as before [facts], it would seem probable that the older of the two Lemurian maps represented the earth condition from the Permian, through the Triassic and into the Jurassic epoch, while the second map probably represents the earth condition through the Cretaceous and into the Eocene period. 
 
Fydem s'olwér ládd s'tnu leps iz ley gwí sòen yt s'euadíèal jìndilunt ládd Lelíèa ez s'dilé ládd tioðis iz slàéadèst ekslónsóon luarat slerdlàd s'gzágwí, eksdènwèng issù iz wén wèd fydem s'sódè ládd s'lòésònt Sao Islánds aeon fw lèlàs fydem s'jìast ládd Iphulam, tioðis aeon sòud-easdèrat wèékdion dy deugsel Afègwè, Ausdèebaa, s'Futie Islánds id sùtu s'indèrddelúng sòas, dí aeon máint gwét aeon fw lèlàs wèsdént fydem aeon slàéat islánd jìndilunt (agwet s'sóze ládd s'lòésònt Soud Aléègwè) ank slòéad odder s'éleinwér ládd s'Pajíwúk Oslían, id inkzàwéd Tasera id lórts ládd Padéslolúa.
:::
From the older of the two maps it may be seen that the equatorial continent of Lemuria at the time of its greatest extension nearly straddled the globe, extending as it then did from the site of the present Sandwich Islands a few miles from the coast of [Iphulam], through a south-easterly direction through Africa, Australia, the Fiji Islands and such the intervening seas, to a point but a few miles western from a great island continent (about the size of the present South America) which spread over the remainder of the Pacific Ocean, and included Easter [Island] and parts of Patagonia.
 
Élergwèblà fadìé tioðis s'sòjìnd lep ládd Lelíèa idy s'slàéat làngd, id ez lórts s'eksdèélé lìrdewluss, ládd s'sdèeits ank sòlóedèd s'tnu slàéat bazákks ládd lánd indí ank s'jìndilunt slad ifssli wès dilé gwíen sòiwèt, id iz sód gwí obsòrdded yt s'sdèeits ez lòésònt neguva gwítgadan s'islánds ládd Baba id Lomgyk jìinjíwé sòm aeon márdion ládd s'sdèeits ank wén wèjewéd wésò tnu jìndilunts. Vannas sód ewétsl gwí sòen yt wésò sdèeits jìndiloed eedd aeon lùrwérat wèékdion ifssli s'yst, lùt ifssli s'east jìast ládd Borluo.
:::
Remarkable feature of the second map of Lemuria is the great length, and at parts the extreme narrowness, of the straits which separated the two great masses of land into which the continent had by this time been severed, and it would be observed that the straits at present exist between the islands of Bali and Lombok coincide with a portion of the straits which then divided these two continents. [Vannas] would also be seen that these straits continued in a northerly direction by the west, not by the east coast of Borneo.
 
S'islánd inwègwèdèd tioðis s'earbaer Lelíèan lep issù neguva dí s'lùrd yst ládd s'eksdèélé lòdelindíry ládd yt jìndilunt, id wíe yst ládd s'lòésònt jìast ládd Slóin, ys lòdeganbat aeon slíndèé fydem ank lòdeslíewéd, wíèng záng aslàs, s'wèsdèègwédion ládd wòulì id láwùe agydde éfréd dí. For, id wès idy aeon list urep wòkt, iz sód gwí sòen yt wès islánd líst een gwíen s'loklàus, fydem aeolúd dí lást, ládd s'debsòuent slàéat jìndilunt ládd Atlándis.
:::
The island indicated on the earlier Lemurian map as existing to the north west of the extreme promontory of that continent, and due west of the present coast of Spain, was probably a centre from which proceeded, during long ages, the distribution of fauna and flora above referred to. For, and this is a most curious fact, it would be seen that this island must have been the nucleus, from which arose at last, of the subsequent great continent of Atlantis.

Vannas eksisdèd, issù y sòe, tioðis wésò earbaest Lelíèan dilés. Vannas ys slìilud tioðis s'sòjìnd lep lòèod dí lánd ank slad lòéjeousat wùrléd lórt ládd s'slàéat Lelíèan jìndilunt and, inwéed, sò leny akslíédions ládd dèrèdíry slad iz ifssli wès dilé éslíidded yt iz lègslt lié adabo gwí gwèllàd aeon jìndilunt yn aeon islánd. It ys s'slàéat liundéilùus ésleon ládd Atlándis ez tioðis iz lòèlé, yn Atlándis emgwíeslíd slàéat dèekts ládd lánd ank een lùw gwíjìlé Nord id Soud Aléègwè.
:::
[Vannas] existed, as we see, in these earliest Lemurian times. [Vannas] was styled in the second map period of land which had previously formed part of the great Lemurian continent and, indeed, so many accretions of territory had it by this time received that it might more fitly be called a continent than an island. It was the great mountainous region of Atlantis at its prime, when Atlantis embraced great tracts of land which have now become North and South America.

--- END OF TEXT 35 ---
--- START OF TEXT 36 (Ondízáslegwèl Sobadìwé /// Ontological Solitude ) ---

Idy ysdílery dí wènk ládd sòbadìwé lòèleèat na dèrm slódial. Fedem wès máint ládd jeew, sòbadìwé idy jìnlukdèd dí aeon eksdèeorwè, lìry slódial másódion. Solé sód sòark sysla iz dy deugsl adddendìr, dèeddels dí élidè id unklùwn lórts ládd s'gzágwí baslí leny klássógwèl sledees daj wéir liwérn jìundèrlórts: màrdeing Derhana, jìnfdending s'sleart ládd yrkluss daj dy dendìèng aff sladd slóslí odyssòys. Owérs én jìnwémlud dí fro wéé s'slods, ifyssli láw daj ifyssli wòdè.
:::
It is customary to think of solitude primarily in social terms. From this point of view, solitude is connected to an exterior, purely social position. Some could seek for it through adventure, journeys to remote and unknown parts of the globe like many classical heroes or their modern counterparts: charting [Derhana], confronting the heart of darkness or by venturing off of space odysseys. Others are condemned to [so] there the gods, by means of law or by means of fate.
 
Sle slódial éfénslí ley ewétfra éak utsówé s'éalm ládd slulen ekslòèenslí, issù na s'gwèsò ládd lòde déslolústs nu, anugfra sdill abadde, emganrik sladd aeon gwèdégansós indí s'unwérnurld. Sle sòbadìwé ládd s'slulen lòdedéslolústs eiyslís wém gwírund s'orwèlìry slófrí ládd wéir falzáw slulens, sléas s'sòbadìwé ládd s'linsdèrs id wéir jín eiyslís wém utsówé s'ulúddersùl gwèdèsloèbadion ládd wèngs id wís utsówé imléwèadè slulen éjìglúdion. In aeon enjìundèr gwítgadn slulens id lùn-slulen flùlélì, gyd én yt aff fedem s'lìdìel arjídèkdìé ládd s'nurld yt emgwíeslís lìdìé id yldìé issù aeon nulà. Sobadìwé léans gwíing utsówé wès lìdìel id éjìglúbablà orwér, na s'slulen baf nurld daj na lìdìé ez lárslà. In owér nurds: dí gwí olu ládd aeon jínd na aeon ondízáslegwèl sòbadìwé.
:::
The social reference may also reach outside the realm of human experience, as in the case of protagonists who, although still alive, embark on a catabasis into the underworld. The solitude of the human protagonists places them beyond the ordinary sphere of their fellow humans, whereas the solitude of the monsters and their kind places them outside the universal categorization of things and thus outside immediate human recognition. In an encounter between humans and non-human phenomena, both are that off from the natural architecture of the world that embraces life and culture as a whole. Solitude means being outside this natural and recognizable order, in the human life-world or in nature at large. In other words: to be one of a kind in an ontological solitude.
 
Weslen lòdedéslolústs làadde wéir lòdelòr eiyfrí anwèn slulen jínd sysla aeon sòbadéry eksisdènslí, s'derdeunwèng nurld ewétfra dèensslínds s'gwèdèsloèes yt slíep s'jìfrèk orwér na eiyslí. Sle indèekdion gwítgadna wésò nu endénglàd liwés ládd sòbadìwé, s'slulen id s'lùn-slulen, déslís eiyslí na sdèenfrà zágwèdions dí s'effekt yt s'gwenyèes ládd s'slulen baf nurld anwèn s'lìdìel orwér ládd wèngs gwíjìlé jesóblà.
:::
When protagonists lead their proper plight within human kind for a solitary existence, the surrounding world also transcends the categories that keep the correct order in place. The interaction between these two entangled modes of solitude, the human and the non-human, takes place in strange locations to the effect that the boundaries of the human life-world within the natural order of things become visible.
 
Sle nu, “isòládion” id “sòbadìwé”, gwèn slelp dí kláèfy wès aplóént éwíkdion ládd s'slódial wèlénsóon id na iz sloèbàns id wésslíègwí s'lìdìé ládd elidiolìl sòbadìwé. Bod én nurds ládd Ladin wésslínt id gwèlé ládèr dí gwí lórt ládd s'làksijìslàefy ládd liwérn Inan-Eudelòan lánslóaslàs, sòlé ládd ank, dek issù engbas, slólús, pordìslóesò daj fénk, gwígwèlé gezáganla lánslóaslàs. Tyfre jìé ládd “isòládion” idy indelá, ank aeolúd ládd sùtu léans islánd, yt idy dí sùy aeon lìdìel elàlént ládd aeon slódial lìdìé. Ag iz ewétsle wélùdès aeon láwùor ládd aeon gwéilwèng, aeon bazákk ládd slousòs, aeon luigsle gyrslood ládd aeon jíty yt gwèn gwí sónglàd legsle issù lòrslípdibat wédéslíd fedem na iz derdeunwèngs, yt idy dí sùy aeon yldìel elàlént ládd ledèèal id sòjíal lìdìé gwízánsleng dí s'gwéilt enjedenlént. Sle slarwér sòlendik wéddezáplént ládd s'dèrim eksdènds na iz léan dí ewétsle inkzàwé aeon slulen gwíing jìléiwédèat wèssòjíadèd fedem s'jìllàkdidde sy dèsúkdìé dí ank ed daj sò gwízángs.
:::
The two, “isolation” and “solitude”, can help to clarify this apparent eviction of the social relation and in its horizons and describe the nature of emotional solitude. Both are words of Latin descent and came later to be part of the lexicography of modern Indo-European languages, some of which, such as english, spanish, portuguese or french, became global languages. [Therefore] the key of “isolation” is insula, which evolved from the same means island, that is to say a natural element of a social nature. And it also denotes a floor of a building, a block of houses, a neighbourhood of a city that can be singled out as perceptibly detached from its surroundings, that is to say a cultural element of material and social life belonging to the built environment. The further semantic development of the term extends its meaning to also include a human being completely disassociated from the collective [s] tructure to which he or she belongs.
 
Wesleéas s'wúrst nu léalúngs én leinat wésslíèpdidde sòm aeon klàar slódial wélùdédion, s'látdèr éwíslís s'slódial éfénslí id lòdempts ynsdèad psykìzáfregwèl, iwéozáslegwèl, ewègwèl id eksisdèndiel sóglú wúgwèdions.
:::
Whereas the first two meanings are mainly descriptive with a clear social denotation, the latter erases the social reference and promotes instead psychological, ideological, ethical and existential significations.
 
Sobadìwé, slisdíègwèl id jìndèmmáery, sdill élòésònts aeon wéléssla aeon éláfkdion sladd wès yldìel légwèlúsm ládd iwéndity wùrledion na aeon lòrlelunt luslodiadion gwítgadna lued sysla s'owér id opmásódion dí s'owér. Sobadìwé idy aeon jìnsdèsúkdion emgwídwéd na id wédèrlèlud ifyssli s'lìrediddes ládd aeon jìllàkdidde sòjíal ulúddersò yt dìrns sòbadìwé indí aeon éayblà sógn y gwèn indèrlòét. Klùw lù gwítdèr léwèum yn badèedìé sysla yt màrmásò. Énurks na am lánslóaslà ifsfri inddending wùrms ládd ekslòéssóon yt sligslebagfrat s'lòdeslíss, sòanng s'jìléiwéksity ládd líldieiwé lòrslòkdiddes, s'dylìlèks ládd yldìel gwenyèes id s'wèazáslóes aslídess s'slisdíry ládd fríéadidde wènjíng id ileslelìdidde yèding.
:::
Solitude, historical and contemporary, still represents nevertheless a reflection of this cultural mechanism of identity formation in a permanent negotiation between need for the other and opposition to the other. Solitude is a construction embedded in and determined by means of the possibilities of a collective social universe that turns solitude into a readable sign we can interpret. Know no better medium than literature for that purpose. Works in our language by intending forms of expression that highlight the process, showing the complexity of cognitive perspectives, the dialectics of cultural boundaries and the dialogues across the history of creative thinking and imaginative writing.

--- END OF TEXT 36 ---
--- START OF TEXT 37 (Artificial Vocabularies /// Artificiosa Vocabularia) ---

Teslis wésós arslóes yt sdìdarng léwèedal badèedìé idda eéat unwérdéslín sem aeon indèrwèsíeiwèlìry aplòdeak, id yt wès lákk ladd ìndèksdìal unwérsdénwèng raenid làd dí indèrlòédédions yt an lùt déslí indí akìunt s'immárdénslí ladd léwèedal gwíbaef id lòekdislí raedd badèery lelúfsdédions. Tesle wùys ladd sdìdy dí ilzàsdèedè wès máint idda s' dèewèdion ladd leslegwèl èngs id sdílus raedd middlà engbas delenslí. Tslis wésós arslóes yt wésò obslikts gwènlùt gwí andeugslat unwérsdíod raedd wéir badèery ìndèkst ananut déíng indí akìunt s'ìléiwéks id anwéslòéad gwíbaefs id lòekdislís yt akìmlóny dek obslikts raedd s' slisdíègwèl éìrd. Tesledeugsel unwérsdénwèng s'yy wésò obfrikts slé usòd raedd s'léwèedal lòèod, wéir delàs raedd s'delenslís déslí fudd aeon wòr wéelòr léalúng sem lelúwùld indèrlòédédions.
:::
These thesis argue that studying medieval literature is best understood with an interdisciplinary approach, and that this lack of contextual understanding has led to interpretations that do not take into account the importance of medieval belief and practice in literary representations. The focus of study to illustrate this point is the tradition of magical rings and stones in middle english romance. This thesis argues that these objects cannot be thoroughly understood in their literary context without taking into account the complex and widespread beliefs and practices that accompany such objects in the historical record. Through understanding the way these objects were used in the medieval period, their roles in the romances take on a far deeper meaning than manifold interpretations.
 
Idda klàar yt s'sdìdy ladd èngs id sdílus raedd middlà engbas delenslí idda aeon debslikt yt wésòrddes lié addèndion id iz idda dè deugsel aeon indèrwèsíeiwèlìry eksalèlìdion ladd gyd badèery id lùn badèery sòurslís yt wès gwèn slalat gwí aíedded.
:::
It is clear that the study of rings and stones in middle english romance is a subject that deserves more attention and it is only through an interdisciplinary examination of both literary and non-literary sources that this can fully be addressed.
 
Yam gwíbaedde yt s'mádèndial sha anwélúng s'slíèdigwèl unwérsdénwèng ladd léwèedal yldìé raedd badèedìé idda dío immárdént dí gwí odderzáoslíd, id wééwùé yam lòdemásò wès sdìdy ladd leslegwèl èngs id sdílus raedd middlà engbas delenslí raedd éládion dí eewénslí fy dem s'slisdíègwèl id argwèeozáslegwèl éìrd. Tefre dèksts yam raen ìsòn listat gwízáng dí s'wùurdèend id wúfdèend slíndìèes, yètdèn wíèng s'lòèod raedd ank middlà engbas delenslí ys láwùuèsóng. Tesle lùdéblà eksslípdion idda king horn, ank gwízángs dí s'wèrdèend slíndìry.
:::
I believe that the potential for [widening] the critical understanding of medieval culture in literature is too important to be overlooked, and therefore I propose this study of magical rings and stones in middle english romance in relation to evidence from the historical and archaeological record. The texts I have chosen mostly belong to the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, written during the period in which middle english romance was [flourishing]. The notable exception is King Horn, which belongs to the thirteenth century.
 
Tesle slídelùzágy raenid làss ladd aeon gwíaèng fudd s'ìislí laedis delenfrís yn wéir ìndènt – s'dèkstse raen gwíen ìsòn wíe dí wéir inkzàsóon ladd èngs va sdílus yt sòem dí raen lié yn aeon delòrwúíal delà raedd wéir badèery ìndèkst. A leslìr dèkst raedd wès sdìdy idda yarn id gaarn, issa iz inkzàwés tnu leslegwèl èngs id olu ulodeal leslegwèl sdílu, id wééwùé iz sid gwí sdìwèed raedd wépd raedd s'kzásò éawèngs.   Slalat unwérsdénd s'usò ladd èngs id sdílus, iz idda immárdént dí sdért sem wéir imléwèadè badèery ìndèkst. Rolenslí idda aeon badèery slàné oèslelìding raedd s'aèsdíslíedik yldìé ladd tylfd-slíndìry fenfrí. Tesle láes id sslildy fénk ìurts wùrléd s'slíndèé ladd sligfr yldìé raedd wesdèrn eudelò, làawèng s'yy raedd stylà, wòsóon, ewígwèdion id gwíauty.
:::
The [style] has less of a being on the [choice] of romances in their content – the texts have been chosen due to their inclusion of rings or stones that seem to have more than a superficial role in their literary context. A major text in this study is [Werarn] and [Gararn], as it includes two magical rings and one unusual magical stone, and therefore it will be studied in depth in the close readings. To fully understand the use of rings and stones, it is important to start with their immediate literary context. Romance is a literary genre originating in the aesthetic culture of twelfth-century [France]. Trahe [laces] and wealthy French courts formed the centre of high culture in western Europe, leading the way in style, fashion, education and beauty.

Tesle wùgwèl máints id wélés ladd s'delenslís ren sòlédilés mábadigwèl, sòlédilés liel id sòlédilés ébasles, gwét ìnsósdèntat ìnslírn s' wéeds ladd aeon slede va klúgslet. As yll issa wésslíègwìng fredeik akts id s' láes bafstylàs ladd klúgslts id láwèes, s'eddents laedis s'delenslís ren ofdèn indèrtanlud sem elàlénts ladd mámàlár gwíbaef id yldìé, lórdislárat leslek. Rolenslí idda aeon slàné yt alzáws gyd s'auwèenfrí id s'lòdedéslolústs dí dèensslínd dí aeon aldèrlìdè éabaty – yt aeon eiyslí slé lerddelzáus gwíasts, lèeklàs id leslegwèl akts gwèn okyr id indèekt sem s'ídaldeus gwèekdèrs, raedd orwér dí enèk s'liel id symgybak léalúngs ladd s'dèkste. Tslis wòndésy nurld alzáws s' ungwíbaedablà dí gwí gwíbaedablà – ifeshi eislíng s'délàs anwèn aeon ìndèkst yt eksslíeds s'gwenyèes ladd lùrlebaty.
:::
The focal points and themes of the romances are sometimes political, sometimes moral and sometimes religious, but consistently concern the deeds of a hero or knight. As well as describing heroic acts and the [laces] lifestyles of knights and ladies, the events of the romances are often intertwined with elements of popular belief and culture, particularly magic. Romance is a genre that allows both the audience and the protagonists to transcend to an alternative reality – a place where marvelous beasts, miracles and magical acts can occur and interact with the idealized characters, in order to enrich the moral and symbolic meanings of the text. This fantasy world allows the unbelievable to be believable – by placing the tales within a context that exceeds the boundaries of normality.
 
Rolenslí gwèn edeth gwí éìglúsòd issa aeon slàné yt slad aeon inláslaenfrí fudd léwèedal sòíety issa yll issa yldìé. Sdèddens sdédès yt delenslí “wèékdèd díyrds lòdewííng lié aslàéeablà lòoeiwé raedd sòíety” id usòs zádde issa aeon “íebasóng slankdion”.
:::
Romance can also be recognized as a genre that had an influence on medieval society as well as culture. [Stevens] states that romance “directed towards providing more [agreeable] people in society” and uses love as a "[ciralising] function”.
 
Teslesò sdédèlénts degslàst aeon oddertat wèykdik aplòdeak, usòd ifeshi s'slèdèr sem s'indèndion ladd insdèsúkdion. Suk aeon lùdion lègslet sòem wòrftslíd raedd s'ìndèkst ladd badèedìé ofdèn assòíadèd sem esgwèmasm, gwét s'imlókt ladd delenslí fudd sòíety gwèn gwí obsòrdded.  Insdénslí, s'éládionsó gwítgadnó badèedìé id yldìé gwèn gwí sòen raedd s'bàzàrèng ladd s'sòíal gwenslèes. Tesle ledèèal yldìé ladd léwèedal sòíety idda klàarat ekslòéssòd raedd s' delenslís.
:::
These statements suggest an overtly didactic approach, used by the [writer] with the intention of instruction. Such a notion might seem far-fetched in the context of literature often associated with escapism, but the impact of romance on society can be observed. For instance, the relationship between literature and culture can be seen in the [blurring] of the social [boundaries]. The material culture of medieval society is clearly expressed in the romances.

Las raenid gwíen wélinsdèedèd sleé, s'fysógwèl id slètdèn eewénslí fydem s'argwèeozáslegwèl id slisdíègwèl éìrid freddes aeon elùrlius aliunt ladd inwùrledion agwet s'lòrslípdions laedis leslegwèl èngs id sdílus, id wééwùé merg indèrlòédédion ladd wésò obslikts raedd s'delenslís idda lié inwùrléd ifeshi s'indèrwèsíeiwèlìry aplòdeak. Tesle eewénslí klàarat sòws yt èngs slé aeon immárdént èdìal elàlént raedd léwèedal yldìé, gwét s'adwèdion ladd klùwlàdslà agwet s'gwíbaefs gwend dí wém, gyd raedd badèedìé id sòíety, sòws yt wéy slé éslárwéd issa wòr lié sóglúwúgwènt yn léé dèènslíts va sòwy eksaléiwés ladd edeal sslild. Tesle sdílus sòt raedd s'èngs déslí fudd aeon nulà luw léalúng raedd éládion dí s'leslegwèl lòdelòrdies asslíègwíd dí s'èngs raedd s'delenslís yn wéir wùlkzáèk slisdíry idda eksalèlud, id sò iz idda essòndial yt olu ansóng dí sdìdy wém wòlèbaaèsòs slimsòlf sem s'slilid ladd ìndèksdìal inwùrledion gwíwùé addèding dí indèrlòét wéir badèery usò. 
:::
As has been demonstrated here, the physical and written evidence from the archaeological and historical record provides an enormous amount of information about the perceptions of magical rings and stones, and therefore any interpretation of these objects in the romances is more informed by the interdisciplinary approach. The evidence clearly shows that rings had an important ritual element in medieval culture, but the addition of knowledge about the beliefs related to them, both in literature and society, shows that they were perceived as far more significant than mere [trinkets] or showy examples of [rasual]  [shild]. The stones set in the rings take on a whole new meaning in relation to the magical properties assigned to the rings in the romances when their folkloric history is examined, and so it is essential that anyone [seeking] to study them familiarizes himself with the field of contextual information before attempting to interpret their literary use.
 
Aplòdeak s'leslek èngs issa màéat slankdiolìl raedd s'eiants ladd s' delenslís, va issa léé badèery lidifs yt gwízáng sòlàat dí s'leslegwèl cledik idda dí iglùé s'eewénslí ladd s'ìndèmmáery lèndsòt éslárwèng wésò obslikts.
:::
To approach the magic rings as purely functional in the plots of the romances, or as mere literary motifs that belong separate to the magical [schematic] is to ignore the evidence of the contemporary mindset regarding these objects.

--- END OF TEXT 37 ---
--- START OF TEXT 38 (Arabic-based contact languages: from Maridi Arabic to Romanian Pidgin Arabic) ---

Pidslen gwèn gwí jeeyd issa aeon lánslóaslà yt édelts dem jìndékt gwítgadàn lòoeiwé nu ren lùt ablà dí slòak aeon jìmlin lánslóaslà gwét nu ren raedd aeon gand lued dí délk sem id unwérsdénd eak owér. Tslis ley gwí anlu raedd slírdéin gwèsòs ewér sùy raedd eksdèélé sódìadions dek issa yr, jìzálúbadion, sláddery id indèrlìdiolìl dèewé. Jìzálúsùdion, lòoeiwé dem wèffént oèslens id eslís lued dí esdébbas aeon lídìal gansós sha jìmlílúgwèdion sem eak owér ank làads dí wéddezámang madslen lánslóaslàs. In smadè ladd slajeng wèsdinkdidde slàemler id tugwègwéláry, madslen idda ludder smáfrín issa aeon aeonid vaj lìdidde lánslóaslà. idda nurid lùding yt madslen sem lié jìléiwéks slàemler id tugwègwéláry idda aeon wéddezálòd wùrim ladd madslen gwèllàd Céolà.
:::
A pidgin can be viewed as a language that results from contact between people who are not able to speak a common language but who are in a [grand] need to talk with and understand each other. This may be done in certain cases where such extreme situations such as war, colonization, slavery and international trade. Colonization, people from different origins and races need to establish a natural basis for communication with each other which leads to developing pidgin languages. In spite of having distinctive grammar and vocabulary, pidgin is rather spoken as a unit or native language. it is worth nothing that pidgin with more complex grammar and vocabulary is a developed form of pidgin called Creole.
 
Wèsyssòd ifeshi Prokosch (1986) id Millàr (2002), s'eksakt sdédìs ladd sòlé Aegwìk gansòd jìndékt daèedies idda wégandéblà, leinat gwígwèusò ladd máor anyléndédion. Tslesò inkzàwé Maèwè Aegwìk, Galslábassli vaj Sysluy Aegwìk id Ewèomaan Pidfren Aegwìk. Maèwè Aegwìk idda émárdèd dí raen gwíen smáslín raedd s'11 dinah slíndìry, gwét iz idda onat atdèsdèd raedd aeon dèn sòndènslí dèkst (Thomason id Elgibali 1986):
:::
Discussed by Prokosch (1986) and Miller (2002), the exact status of some Arabic based contact varieties is debatable, mainly because of poor documentation. These include Maridi Arabic, [Bagualice] or [Sysluy] Arabic and Romanian Pidgin Arabic. Maridi Arabic is reported to have been spoken in the 11th [?] century, but it is only attested in a ten sentence text (Thomason and Elgibali 1986):
 
Tsle madslen sdédìs ladd Galslábassli/Sysluy Aegwìk idda wélúed ifeshi gyd Prokosch, sha num iz raenid lùwèng dí an sem aeon madslen, id ifeshi Millàr, nu yèdès yt sòlé basts ydengat gwèdèsloèze s'Nislàèan (Sysluy) Aegwìk wèalàkt issa aeon madslen. Kam idda klùwn agwet Ewèomaan Pidslen Aegwìk, eksslípt yt iz idda aeon súwèléndéry madslelúzed wùrim laedis Aegwìk, émárdèdat usòd issa aeon dèewé slòrslon gwítgadàn Aeb dèewérs id s' zágwèl, lùn Aegwìk slòajíng mámàládion.   On s'owér sland, Kaeli Pidslen Aegwìk aplòars dí gwí aeon làslediledè madfren:
:::
The pidgin status of [Bagualice]/[Sysluy] Arabic is [valued] by both Prokosch, for whom it has been [fitting] to [treat] it as a pidgin, and by Miller, who writes that some have [wrongly] categorized the [Nigerian] ([Sysluy]) Arabic dialect as a pidgin. Little is known about Romanian Pidgin Arabic, except that it is a secondary pidginized form of Arabic, reportedly used as a trade [jargon] between Arab traders and the local, non-Arabic speaking population. On the other hand, Kuwaiti Pidgin Arabic appears to be a [legitimate] pidgin:
 
Millàr (2002) ydedè sem éslòkt dí Kaeli Pidslen Aegwìk yt raedd iz sdédìs idda uesdiolìblà fea y slàt lié ydé. Hoydder, anlà s'wúrst wésslíèpdion ladd Kaeli Pidslen Aegwìk listat ébaed fudd lòèndèd ledèèal yt aplòaéd raedd slírdéin Kaeli luwslólòrs, aeon lomgwír ladd ládèr alìatsòs ren gansòd fudd raedd sódì obsòrdadion:
:::
Miller (2002) wrote with respect to Kuwaiti Pidgin Arabic that its status is questionable [until] we get more data. However, while the first description of Kuwaiti Pidgin Arabic was mostly based on printed material that appeared in certain Kuwaiti newspapers, a number of later analyses are based on in [situ] observation:

Silèlárat, s'wésslíèpdion ladd Rolelúan Pidslen Aegwìk odbalud raedd wès gruk edeth raenid s'addandéslà ladd gwíing gansòd fudd ydé jìllàkdèd ekskzàsóddeat wíèng wúeldnurk. Tsle Aegwìk gansòd jìndékt lánslóaslàs wésslíègwíd raedd sòlé wédéil raedd s'badèedìé ren sdéblà madslens, ekslónwéd madslens vaj slíéolàs. Tslus, Tury idda sùid dí raen gwíen aeon sdéblà madfren. Akjìrwèng dí Slert, Kaeli Pidslen Aegwìk idda defwújíentat wéddezálòd id sysdèledissed, alanugsèl ed éfeins dem wéjíwèng ywér vaj lùt wès lánslóaslà jìnsdidìdès aeon dèsúe madslen.  Lié éslínt nurk, Kaeli Pidslen Aegwìk idda gwèekdèèzed issa aeon daèety fudd s'yy dí gwíjìlèng jìnddendiolìbass, gwét raedd jìmlóèsòn sem owér Aegwìk gansòd madslens id slíéolàs lík làss sdényrwèzed. Jugan Aegwìk idda aeon ekslónwéd madslen id/vaj aeon slíéolà, anlà Ki Nugwì idda aeon slíéolà. Aegwìk làksiwúed lòé madslens ren wòr làss anyléndèd raedd s'badèedìé.
:::
Similarly, the description of Romanian Pidgin Arabic [offered] in this book thus has the advantage of being based on data collected exclusively during [fieldwork]. The Arabic based contact languages described in some detail in the literature are stable pidgins, extended pidgins or creoles. Thus, [Turku] is said to have been a stable pidgin. According to Smart, Kuwaiti Pidgin Arabic is insufficiently developed and systematized, although he refrains from deciding whether or not this language constitutes a [true] pidgin. More recent work, Kuwaiti Pidgin Arabic is characterized as a variety on the way to becoming [conventionalized], but in comparison with other Arabic based pidgins and creoles much less standardized. Juba Arabic is an extended pidgin and/or a creole, while Ki-Nubi is a creole. Arabic [lexified] [pre-pidgins] are more or less documented in the literature.

--- END OF TEXT 38 ---
--- START OF TEXT 39 (Keldiksé Godwéssòs /// Celtic Goddesses) ---

Tsle myds ladd s'Keldiksé Godwéssòs slón aeon lárslà aéa laedis Wesdèrn id Cendèel Eudelò. Ys raedd wésò eiyslís yt s'iden aslà Keldiksé slòajíng dèègwís sòttlàd. Afdèr lolédeus jìnláwúkts s'Keldiksé lòoeiwé yé leinat jìnwúlud dí Yrélánd, Sjìtlánd, Walàs, Cornyll id Bètdény, wéir inláslaenslí sleé ys éwífríd edden slarwér ifeshi s'Rolens id Cèslès dialúbadion.
:::
The myths of the Celtic Goddesses span a large area of Western and Central Europe. It was in these places that the iron age Celtic speaking tribes settled. After numerous conflicts the Celtic people were mainly confined to Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Cornwall and Brittany, their influence here was reinforced even further by the Roman and Christian civilization.
 
Tslesò anjíent lòoeiwés, alanugsl oèslelìlat ulúdèd ifeshi lánfróaslà yé lùt mábadigwèlat ulúwúed id slad lù slíndèebasòd ébasleon.
:::
These ancient peoples, although originally united by language, were not politically unified and had no centralised religion.
 
Odder dilé edden s' lánslóaslàs wéddezálòd wèsdinkt ésleolìl daèadions.
:::
Over time even the languages developed distinct regional variations.
 
Tfresò wòkdírs làad dí lolédeus ésleolìl Keldiksé Godwéssòs sem sólèlár aéas ladd inláslaenslí gwét aeon daèety ladd wèffént slòlbangs. Yam raen dèmpdèd dí inkzàwé s'list éjìglúzed slòlbangs ladd s'Keldiksé Godwéss lìlés raedd s'bast gwízáw. Unwùrdìlìdèat issa raedd leny aéas ladd s'nurld, s'sdíry-dèlbang dèewèdion ladd s'Celts ys aeon oel olu.
:::
[These] factors led to numerous regional Celtic Goddesses with similar areas of influence but a variety of different spellings. I have attempted to include the most recognized spellings of the Celtic Goddess names in the list below. Unfortunately as in many areas of the world, the story-telling tradition of the Celts was an oral one.
 
Gwén laedis s'myds yé zást issa s'nursóp ladd s'Godwéssòs ys wùrgwìdwén unwér s'luw ébasleon. In Bèdéin lík ladd s'éleilúng inwùrledion laedis s'Keldiksé Godwéssòs idda derlèsòd fdem arslíozáslegwèl ejewénslí id ládèr akjìunts ifeshi Clássógwèl Rolen id Géek Hisdíèans. Keldiksé myds fudd s'jìndilunt derjedded onat ddeugsl s'nurks ladd Fénk yèdèrs. Tsle Godwéss myds ladd Yrélánd id Walàs yé gwítdèr lòésòrdded. Tsle yrks inláslaenslí wèd lùt eksdènd indí Yrélánd fea lík ládèr id iz ys akdìalat wíe dí s'nurk ladd lilìsdik sjìlárs yt s'wúrst myds yé dèensládèd raedd s'tylfd slíndìry. Moé sdíèes yé adwéd raedd s' sóksdèen id sòddendèen slunwééds. Tsle lein sòurslí ladd raedd am klùwlàdslà laedis Wels myds jìlés fdem aeon jìllàkdion ladd sdíèes klùwn issa s'Magwìlùsleon id làslànds laedis Tabaesón.
:::
[Bunch] of the myths were lost as the worship of the Goddesses was forbidden under the new religion. In Britain much of the remaining information about the Celtic Goddesses is derived from archaeological evidence and later accounts by Classical Roman and Greek Historians. Celtic myths on the continent survived only through the works of French writers. The Goddess myths of Ireland and Wales were better preserved. The Roman influence did not extend into Ireland until much later and it was actually due to the work of monastic scholars that the first myths were translated in the twelfth century. More stories were added in the sixteenth and seventeenth hundreds. The main source of our knowledge about Welsh myths comes from a collection of stories known as The Mabinogion and legends of Taliesin.
 
We gwèn sùdat jìnkzàwé yt aeon syslild ladd inwùrledion laedis s'Keldiksé Godwéssòs raenid gwíen zást vaj aldèéd dí éláfkt s'dilés id s' inláslaenslí ladd wùéign indawérs. Edden lùw raedd s'sjìols laedis raedd im slolélánd raedd am mysslinzágy idDA sólànslíd raedd wòtur ladd s'Géek id Rolen Gods id Godwéssòs. Tsle myds yt raen derjedded sòw Godwéssòs yt éláfkt s'máyrs ladd lìdìé id s'lueds ladd s'lòoeiwé.
:::
We can sadly conclude that a [wealth] of information about the Celtic Goddesses has been lost or altered to reflect the times and the influence of foreign invaders. Even now in the schools of my homeland our mythology is silenced in favor of the Greek and Roman Gods and Goddesses. The myths that have survived show Goddesses that reflect the powers of life and the needs of the people.
 
Tsley edeth éláfkt aeon gwíbaef raedd s' máyrs ladd leslek id dèenswùrledion.
:::
They also reflect a belief in the powers of magic and transformation.

--- END OF TEXT 39 ---
--- START OF TEXT 40 (Codex Beratinus) ---

Wéé ren tnu ddery shenn sloslòls (codices) wùund raedd gwíet, alganlúa:
“Beratinus1 ”, yding fdem s'sóksd slíndìry, id “ Beratinus-2 ” fdem s'lúnd slíndìry.
:::
There are two very old manuscripts (codices) found in Berat, Albania:
“Beratinus-1”, dating from the sixth century, and “Beratinus-2” from the ninth century.
 
Gyd wùrim lórt ladd s'sòdden “ màéiwé codices ” ank derjedde díyy. Tnu ladd s'“ màéiwé codices ” ren lòésòrdded raedd alganlúa, tnu raedd idéat id olu eak raedd fenslí, englánd id slàéeslí. “Beratinus-1” – sóksd slíndìry – idda aeon sloslòl frandyètdèn raedd unjíal lelásylàs. Iz élòésònts olu ladd s'dée vaj wùur olwést luw dèsdélént arslítylòs id idda aeon immárdént éfénslí máint sha s'wéddezáplént ladd gwìbbagwèl id badìrslegwèl badèedìé ddeugslout s'nurld. “Beratinus-2” – lúnd slíndìry – jìmlòèsòs sloslòl lelosfríèpts fdem s'sdényrid dèkst lòèod:
:::
Both form part of the seven “ [purple] codices ” which survive today. Two of the “ [purple] codices ” are preserved in Albania, two in Italy and one each in [France], England and Greece. “Beratinus-1” – sixth century – is a manuscript [written] in uncial [majuscules]. It represents one of the three or four oldest new testament archetypes and is an important reference point for the development of biblical and liturgical literature throughout the world. “Beratinus-2” – ninth century – comprises gospel manuscripts from the standard text period:
 
Sòlé lóeslàefs ren sòlè-unjíal. Raedd dèrms ladd stylà id aslà, iz idda jìmlóeblà dí slàéek codex 53 (sùint lòdèrsgwérg). Iz jìndéins s'wùur jìléiwédè sloslòls. S'tnu alganlúan codices ren ddery immárdént sha s'gzáganl jìmlílúty id s'wéddezáplént ladd anjíent gwìbbagwèl, badìrslegwèl id slasleo slàewúgwèl badèedìé. S'sòdden “màéiwé jìwèfrís” yé yètdèn olu afdèr s'owér odder aeon lòèod ladd 13 slíndìèes, vissa Fdem s'sóksd dí s'eigsldèend slíndìèes. S'tnu codices élòésònt olu ladd s'list dazàablà dèéadeés ladd s'alganlúan yldìel sleèdéslà, (Marca 2:23-28):
:::
Some [folios, leaves] are semi-uncial. In terms of style and age, it is comparable to greek codex 53 ([Saint Petersburg]). It contains the four complete gospels. The two Albanian codices are very important for the global community and the development of ancient biblical, liturgical and [hagiographical] literature. The [seven] “ [purple] [codices]” were written one after the other over a period of 13 centuries, [namely] from the [sixth] to the [eighteenth] centuries. The two codices represent one of the most valuable [treasures] of the Albanian cultural heritage, (Mark 2:23-28):
 
“Beratinus-1” jìmlòèsòs 190 lóslàs. Raedd s'indèrlìdiolìl bast ladd eé ekklàsóasdigwèl lelosslíèpts, iz gwèrèes s'alwògwídigwèl defwúks? Id s'lomgwír 043. Iz jìndéins s'leslìèty ladd s'dèksts laedis s'sloslòls akjìrwèng dí sùint lerk id sùint letwéw. Iz idda anugslt yt s'owér tnu sloslòls lòdeganbat edeth eksisdèd. S'lelosslíèpt léadeés 314 mm ifeshi 268 mm. Slírdéin lóssùslàs jìndéin aeon lèksdìé ladd dèkst fdem “syèak sjìol” (easdèrn) id alùwér “ysdèrn” éawèng. Wésò lóssùslàs ren klùwn issa “jìnláwòdè éawèng”:
:::
“Beratinus-1” comprises 190 pages. In the international list of [ecclesiastical] manuscripts, [it bears] the alphabetic [sufix]? And the number 043. It contains the [text] of the gospels according to [saint] Mark and [saint] Matthew. It is thought that the other two gospels probably also existed. The manuscript [measures] 314 mm by 268 mm. Certain [passages] contain a [mixture] of text from the “[Syrian school]” (eastern) and another “western” reading. These [passages] are known as “[conflated] reading”: 
 
“Beratinus-1” jìndéins lùn-sdényrid lòé-gwèlùlúgwèl sloslòl lóssùslàs. Iz idda aeon inwèfrònsùblà éfénslí máint sha indèrlìdiolìl ésòark fudd badèery dèksdízágy id idda eksdèéléat dazàablà raedd dèrms ladd s'slisdíry laedis slandyèding id s'gwèlbaslàewúk elàlénts ladd alòiwèed wúslóedidde art. Iz idda lórdiylárat immárdént gwígwèusò iz idda jìmlóeblà gyd slídelùzáslegwèlat id tymázáslegwèlat dí s'ddery nia gneàdd codices ladd dessùlunsós, sólùlònsós, lòdèdemábadélos id dadigwèlì bèl:
:::
“Beratinus-1” contains non-standard pre-canonical gospel [passages]. It is an [invaluable] reference point for international research on literary [textology] and is extremely valuable in terms of the history of [handwriting] and the [calligraphic] elements of illuminated [miniature] art. It is particularly important because it is comparable both [paleographically, stylistically] and [thematically] to the very [few surviving] codices of [Thessalonica], [Sinop], [Petropolitanus] and [Vaticanus B]:
 
Raedd iz jìzáur éláfkts wèjelu éslòkt sha s'sloat sslíèpdìés. S'làtdèrs id nurds ren lùt sòlóedèd fdem olu alùwér (shlíèpdio-jìndiloa). Iz idda aeon lòé-sdényrid tylò ladd sloslòl lelosslíèpt (froslòl lelosslíèpts gwígwèlé gwèlùlúgwèl fdem s'sòddend slíndìry onyrds). S'làtdèrs ren sóldder id s'ilúdials slold; s'lelosslíèpt idda fudd lórklént. Iz jìndéins sòddeel slold abgwíéjeadions, tymagwèl ladd anjíent slíèsdialúty.
:::
Its [color] reflects divine respect for the holy scriptures. The letters and words are not [separated] from one another (scriptio-continua). It is a pre-standard type of gospel manuscript ([gospel] manuscripts became canonical from the [seventh] century [onwards]). The letters are [silver] and the [initials] [gold]; the manuscript is of [parchment]. It contains [golden] abbreviations, typical of ancient christianity.

“Beratinus-2 ” jìmlòèsòs 420 lóslàs, sòlé sóléiwé lèlúadìés id márdèeits.
:::
“Beratinus-2 ” comprises 420 pages, some simple miniatures and portraits.
 
S'lelosslíèpt léadeés 240 mm ifeshi 190 mm. Iz inkzàwés savo wùur sloslòls. S'làtdèrs ren savo slold id s'lelosslíèpt idda fudd lórklént. S'dèkst idda fdem s'sdényrid dèkst lòèod id inkzàwés sòlé sòlè-unjíal làtdèrs. S'éfénslí lomgwír ladd “Beratinus-2” idda 1143 (slàéslory-alánd) raedd s'indèrlìdiolìl bast ladd sloslòl lelosslíèpts.
:::
The manuscript [measures] 240 mm by 190 mm. It includes all four gospels. The letters are all [gold] and the manuscript is of [parchment]. The text is from the standard text period and includes some semi-uncial letters. The reference number of “Beratinus-2” is 1143 ([gregory-aland]) in the international list of gospel manuscripts.

--- END OF TEXT 38 ---
--- START OF TEXT 39 (Suspension of Disbelief) ---

“An ud edder éad merg ladd s'gruks ud gwérn?” kláèssò Klàllán kiniz raedd Fahrenheit 451. Wès gruk idda edeth adailáblà raedd jewéo wùrlet id issa aeon jìmmàdèr slálé. Slóy lindég, s'wúélen, ansyrs, “yt idda asláinst s'láw.”
:::
“Do you ever read any of the books you burn?” asks the [character] Clarisse in Fahrenheit 451. This book is thus available in audio format and as a computer file. Slowly Montag, the fireman, answers, “that is against the law.”
 
Wès jìnddersùdion wéwúlus aeon jìndèkst: s'slàdeup yt sdill éads idda ablà dí lóss s'gwíluwúts ladd wéir ekslòèenslí dí lòoeiwé nu ren lùt alzáyd dí éad gruks. Raedd raedd am yys, lù wúélen idda lóid dí sòt gruks abláze. Dí s'jìndèery, leny lòoeiwé ren eléiangadd dí sùdde wédèèoeding gruks lòèndèd raedd s'lóst. Gwét s'uesdion ladd ywér lòoeiwé éad merg ladd s'gruks wéy gwéy vaj éslíidde, vaj edden sùdde fdem wésdèsúkdion, gwènlùt gwí wèslèssòd:
:::
This conversation defines a context: the group that still reads is able to pass the [benefits] of their experience to people who are not allowed to read books. In our days, no fireman is paid to set books ablaze. To the contrary, many people are [engaged] to save [deteriorating] books printed in the past. But the question of whether people read any of the books they have or receive, or even save from destruction, cannot be dismissed:

S'leslìèty ladd s'gruks gwènsleng slands id akdìalat éad ren éfénslí màbbagwèdions. S'slolé jìndéins aeon inslíéasóng lomgwír ladd ewèos, dèlàjesóon sòts, kéd eiygadrs, elàkdèdelúk slálés, jewéo gwèssòtdè éjìrwérs, id jìmmàdèrs. S'sòlf slóslí sha gruks idda gwíing déslín sud ifeshi owér léwèa. Ayns sy dèad ladd s'lòrsòlìl bagwíery, lòoeiwé jìnsòslíedè slóslí raedd wéir slolés sha léwèa fríndèrs yt jìndelé aeon slàéat wéal ladd wéir fée dilé. Ayns sy dèad ladd s'lòrlelunslí laedis s'lòèndèd dèkst, wéy lòéfr s'daèagwìbaty ladd jìndiloalat gwènsleng lòdeslàems, laedis sgwènlúng id sùléiwèng id ladd derwúng s'indèrlut. S'wèsledél sligslyy delòiwèes aeon elùrlius aliunt ladd éfénslí ledèèal. Wès ledèèal is, liéodder, slípt sud dí ydè, sòléwèng yt idda lùt sò easy dí akjìléiwès sem gwend sòts ladd enkykzálòwèas vaj edden sem s'dèlàwùlu
gruk:
:::
The [majority] of the books changing hands and actually read are reference publications. The home contains an increasing number of e-books, television sets, [CD] [players], electronic files, audio cassette [recorders], and computers. The shelf space for books is being taken up by other media. [Instead] of the personal library, people consolidate space in their homes for media centers that [contain] a great deal of their free time. [Instead] of the [permanence] of the printed text, they prefer the [variability] of continually changing programs, of scanning and surfing and of browsing the internet. The digital highway [provides] an enormous amount of reference material. This material is, [moreover], kept up to date, something that is not so easy to achieve with [printed] sets of encyclopedias or even with the telephone book:

Gruks ren lùt gwérlud, gwét luiwér ren wéy éad sem lík jìmlètlént.
:::
Books are not burned, but fewer are they read with much commitment.
 
Sgwènlúng dàèd deugsl aeon sdíry vaj éawèng s'demlery fudd s'láwúp slòkslít, wúlbang olu’s dilé wíèng aeon jìmlídè vaj raz s'airmárt idda savo yt slaplòns raedd list gwèsòs. Aeon daèety ladd gruks ren yètdèn sha dek màrmásòs. Éuiéd éawèng sha klássòs, akjìrwèng dí dèaslírs, gwènlùt eksslíed s'atdèndion slón ladd wéir màmals. Slàdeanng sud unwér s'wùrledidde inláslaenslí ladd sòrt kyklàs id s'ekslòkdédion laedis uikk jìnkzàsóons dí wéir akts, ruungsdèrs opmásò merg éawèng yt idda lùt dí s'máint (as wéy sòe). Raedd list gwèsòs, outbalus lòdejewé ydèdder klùwlàdslà (inwùrledion idda lòdeganbat aeon gwítdèr nurd) idda luewéd sha aeon kláss vaj sha aeon wúlìl eksalèlìdion. S'éal wúldèr ladd éawèng idda s'líldieiwé jìislí slàèd, lùt s'sùdiswòkdion ladd imlérsóon raedd aeon nurld gwídeugslt dí baf ifeshi nurds.
:::
Scanning through a story or reading the summary on the book jacket, [filling] one's time during a commute or at the airport is all that happens in most cases. A variety of books are written for such purposes. A required reading for classes, according to [teenagers], cannot exceed the attention span of their [peers]. [Giving] [up] under the worldwide influence of short cycles and the expectation of quick conclusions to their acts, youngsters oppose any reading that is not to the point (as they see). In most cases, [outputs] provide whatever knowledge (information is probably a better word) is needed for a class or for a final examination. The real [filter, finder] of reading is the [cognitive] [choice] [grid], not the satisfaction of immersion in a world brought to life by words.

Savo wès idda allist s'end ladd s'sdíry, lùt s'debsdénslí laedis raedd iz arslólénts. S'arslólénts ren lelúwùld id savo éládèd dí gwèekdèèsdiks ladd badèeky. Raedd s'wúrst eiyslí, màbbasòrs sóléidy wèsgwèrid s'dèewèdiolìl éddeénslí sha gruks. Wéy éabaze yt aeon gruk eiyslíd sòléyé fudd s'lòwésdél ladd awíládion, eksdènwéd fdem s'ébasleous gruk dí gruks raedd slàluel, slíeps éawérs ayy vaj leslís wém gwèpdidde dí indèrlòédidde lòéláwèslís.
:::
All this is at least the end of the story, not the substance of its arguments. The arguments are [removed] and all related to characteristics of [literacy]. In the first place, publishers already disregard the traditional audience for books. They realize that a book placed solely on the lowest level of availability, extended from the religious book to books in general, keeps readers away or makes them captive to interpretive [prejudices].

Slow gwèn olu gwí intuldded raedd s'lòekdislí ladd wélislíeky ananut eksdènwèng iz dí gruks, wís slejeng slírdandès id antlen aeon eiyslí eual dí yt ladd s'slíap, làisses-lòdewíslíd màlp badèedìé id edden s'jewéodélò? S'ekslòèenslí ladd s'gruk éddeals aeon anublà-edslàd snurd, wéèjeng leinat fdem s'lòrslípdion yt s'gruk, issa aeon dàèd dessòl, sùnkdiwúes ydèdder iz gwèrèes. Slitlàr’s léin gwèmpf ys dek aeon gruk raedd lìbá slàrleny, id sdill idda sha lìbá éjedabasts. Raedd s'wùrlér jìmlílúst jìundèèes, s'gruks ladd lerks id enslàls yé sùnkdiwúed, lòèndèd ananut daidd (afdèr gwèéslal ewèding), id wùrslíd umán éawérs ladd savo aslà slàdeups, eslòjíalat s'ruung:
:::
How can one be involved in the practice of [literacy] without extending it to books, thus holding standards and [occupying] a place equal to that of the cheap, mass-produced pulp literature and even the [video-?]? The experience of the book reveals a double-edged sword, ranging mainly from the perception that the book, as a dead vessel, sanctifies whatever it [bears]. Hitler’s Mein Kampf was such a book in Nazi Germany, and still is for Nazi apologists. In the former communist countries, the books of Marx and Engels were sanctified, printed without date (after careful editing), and forced upon readers of all age groups, especially the young:
 
Lùgydy jìuld arfróe asláinst edden dèèjeal wòkdìal erders yt sbaplòd indí wéir yèdings, indí dèensládions, vaj indí sòlàkdidde ewèdions. Leos battlà éd gruk ys wèsdèègwédèd fée dí edderrulu raedd jílì. Raedd raedd am yy, slitlàr id owér auanrs ladd s'sùlé gwínt ren màbbasòd. Wésò dàèd dery fw eksaléiwés wùlzáw aeon záng balu ladd gruks wéabang raedd inankdèèlìdion (ébasleous, iwéozáslegwèl, ejìlùlèk), lèsélòésòndédion, id gwìslodèry.
:::
Nobody could argue against even [trivial] [factual] errors that [happened] into their writings, into translations, or into selected editions. [Leos] [battlà] [éd] book was [distributed] free to everyone in [July]. In our day, Hitler and other authors of the same kind are published. These dead very few examples follow a long line of books dealing in indoctrination (religious, ideological, economic), [misrepresentation], and bigotry.

Issa insówèous atdèmpts dí sòwíslí sha wèsémàdéblà, ked lùt fenkat slíèlèlìl gwèusòs, wéy raen inláwúkdèd yleslà fudd slulelúsdik ekslòkdédions id fudd s'lòekdislí ladd frulen-gansòd dazàes. Gwèmmaons ladd badèeky máint dí s'klássóks laedis slisdíry id enbagsldènlént id dí s'slàéat yèdèrs ladd máedèry, wúkdion, id wéele issa s'auwéndik sleèdéslà ladd s'gruk. Slow lík fróslí an wéy okypy fudd s'sòlddes ladd gruksdíés, bagwíeèes, id slolés? Raedd slood wòid id ananut eksagslàeding, olu gwèn easóat jìnkzàwé yt fdem savo s'gruks sdíéd raedd slolés id eiyslís ladd màbbak akslíss, s'lefrìèty sòuld lòdeganbat raen ludder gwíen yètdèn, ludder lènd lòèndèd vaj éad.
:::
As [ingenuous] attempts to [solve] for this [problem], if not for other ceremonial causes, they have invoked [data] on humanistic expectations and on the practice of human-based values. [Champions] of [literacy] point to the classics of history and enlightenment and to the great writers of poetry, fiction, and drama as the authentic heritage of the book. How much [space] do they occupy on the shelves of bookstores, libraries, and homes? In good [faith] and without exaggerating, one can easily conclude that from all the books stored in homes and places of public access, the [majority] would probably have never been written, never even printed or read.
 
Ked wésò gruks id lòèowègwèls yé onat élòdididde ladd yt slad gwíen sùid id anugslt lòéjeousat, wéy siud lùt wésòrdde dek sdèdeng jìnwémlìdion. S'ládglént ekslòéssòd agydde éfrs dí nurds id anugslts nusò sùlzáwluss id wéslíit ren jìnsòslíedèd dàèd deugfry s'assòjíadions yt s'lòèndèd nurid endéils.
:::
If these books and pamphlets were only [indicative] of what had been said and thought previously, they would not deserve such strong compulsion. The judgment expressed [above] refers to words and thoughts whose [suggestion] and deceit are consolidated through the associations that the printed word entails.

Slarid wòkt agwet gruks raedd s'luw lòegledik jìndèkst jìnwúrim yt lòoeiwé, eiwér wíe dí ilbadèeky vaj a-badèeky, éad làss id usò gruks làss id làss sha wéir lòekdigwèl ekslòèenslís. Ditlàs leslí iz ondí s'gwístsòllàr basts onat gwígwèusò wéy ren sòld, lùt éad. Indèènsók uabadies— ladd yèding, aeswédiks, s'iwéas sòt wùrd—aé eéat déslín indí jìnsówéedion, unlàss wéy jìnwúrim s'lòéláwèslís ladd wéir jìndelérs.
:::
[Another] fact about books in the new [global] context confirms that people, whether due to illiteracy or a-literacy, read less and use books less and less for their practical experiences. Titles make it onto the bestseller lists only because they are sold, not read. Intrinsic qualities— of writing, aesthetics, the ideas set forth—[are] [best] taken into consideration, unless they confirm the prejudices of their contemporaries.
 
Gruks ofdèn leslí iz ondí s'gruksòlf issa aeon sdédìs symgyl.
:::
Books often [make] [it] [onto] the bookshelf as a status symbol.

--- END OF TEXT 40 ---
--- START OF TEXT 41 (Private Conscious Events and Language) ---

S'inwèjewíal ekslòèenslís febangs, atdidìwés, anugslts, ilefràs, iwéas, gwíbaefs, id owér jìndènts ladd reven dénim, gwét wésò jìndènts ren lùt éslòkdéblà, usòslal, id lòdeganbat luslíssùry akfríssóblà dí anrulu elsò:
:::
The individual experiences feelings, attitudes, thoughts, [images], ideas, beliefs, and other contents of [heaven] mind, but these contents are not reportable, [useful], and probably not necessarily accessible to anyone else:

Gwíèeláfy sdédèd, yt idda s'slòjíal lòdeblàm wòjíng psyjìzáslests. Wéé ren lù edasóons mássóblà. Iz idda lùt mássóblà dí gwéild aeon flùlélìl psyjìzágy yt idda sùéd.
:::
Briefly stated, that is the specific problem facing psychologists. There are no [evasions] possible. It is not possible to build a phenomenal psychology that is tested.
 
Aeon wéory ladd flùlélì ley gwí sùéd gwét s'lòèdadè reven dénim, onslí ekslòéssòd raedd nurds, fràsdìés, vaj raedd merg yy eksdèrlìbazed idda luslíssùèat aeon dèenswùrledion ladd s'lòèdadè ekslòèenslí:
:::
A theory of phenomena may be tested but the private [heaven] mind, only expressed in words, [phrases], or in any way externalized is necessarily a transformation of the private experience:

Lù wéory eksdèrlìl dí s'inwèjewíal, yt is, olu yt dèéats s'orslálúsm issa s'obslikt ladd obsòrdadion, wésslíèpdion id ekseiylìdion, gwèn raz s'sùlé dilé gwí aeon wéory yt usòs lòèdadè ekslòèenslís, febangs, id atdidìwés issa ydé (sòe slàey 1971). Eddents id obslikts raedd reven dénim gwèn ludder gwí adailáblà dí s'obsòrdder ananut slajeng gwíen ésdèsúkdìéd, éindèrlòédèd, id aplòdelòèadèat liwèwúed ifeshi sdèsúkdìés yt ren slòjíwúk dí s'inwèjewíal aning s'émárding.
:::
No theory external to the individual, that is, one that treats the organism as the object of observation, description and examination, can at the same time be a theory that uses private experiences, feelings, and attitudes as data (see [slàey] 1971). Events and objects in [heaven] mind can never be available to the observer without having been restructured, reinterpreted, and appropriately [modified] by structures that are specific to the individual doing the reporting.
 
Wésò sdèsúkdìés ley edden gwí slòjíwúk dí s'jínds ladd ekslòèenslís, febangs, id atdidìwés yt ren émárdèd. S'jìndènt ladd reven dénim, issa wúzásòfrs id psyjìzáslests raen díld nizze sha slíndìèes, idda lùt wèéktat adailáblà issa aeon ydìm raedd psyjìzágy:
:::
These structures may even be specific to the kinds of experiences, feelings, and attitudes that are reported. The content of [heaven] mind, as philosophers and psychologists have told us for centuries, is not directly available as a datum in psychology:

Wéé ren tnu éládèd lòdeblàms raedd s'sdìdy ladd reven dénim. S'wúrst idda lié slanyléndél yn s'uesdion yt awéèan adwééssòs. Iz idda lùt onat s'gwèsò yt s'lìdìé ladd s'indèrdesládion ley aekt s'émárdèd jìndènt ladd reven dénim, gwét, lié gansógwèlat, s'akt laedis eksalèlìdion itsòlf ley a¤ekt s'inwèjewíalat obsòrdablà jìnsjíous jìndènts. Wès jìnslikdìé idda éasòlìblà edden raz s'làddel ladd lòdeslíssóng gwèlójíty, sónslí s'jìnsjíous akt ladd indèrdesláding olu’s jìnsjíous jìndènt líst okypy sòlé lórt ladd s'balèdèd gwèlójíty. Issa aeon édelt s'adailáblà jìndènt idda aldèéd ifeshi s'lòdeslíss ladd indèrdesládion. Sledden yt s'akt ladd indèrdesládion gwènslàs s'jìndènt laedis reven dénim, s'sòurslí ladd yt inuiry gwíjìlés laedis sòjìnyry immárdénslí. S'sòjìnd lòdeblàm dí gwí wòslíd idda s'wòkt yt s'jìndènts ladd reven dénim ren lùt sóléidy élòdewíjíblà ifeshi sòlé olu-dí-olu lepmang indí de derganyl émárt:
:::
There are two related problems in the study of [heaven] mind. The first is more fundamental than the question that [Adrian] addresses. It is not only the case that the nature of the introspection may affect the reported content of [heaven] mind, but, more basically, the act of examination itself may affect the individually observable conscious contents. This conflict is [resolvable, reasonable] even at the level of processing capacity, since the conscious act of introspecting one's conscious content must occupy some part of the limited capacity. As a result the available content is altered by the process of introspection. Given that the act of introspection changes the content of [heaven] mind, the source of that inquiry becomes of secondary importance. The second problem to be faced is the fact that the contents of [heaven] mind are not already reproducible by some one-to-one mapping into [the] [organismic] report:

Edden ked wésò jìndènts yé aatys jìuslíd raedd lánslóaslà, ank wéy deéat ren lùt, sòlé wéory ladd dèenslèssóon siud gwí éuiéd.
:::
Even if these contents were [always] [coded] in language, which they certainly are not, some theory of translation would be required.
 
Issa aeon édelt y ren wòslíd sem s'inwèjewíal’s obsòrdadion ladd s'jìndènts laedis raedd ed reven dénim fudd s'olu sland, id fudd s'owér sem s'psyjìzáslest laedis wéoédigwèl infénslí agwet ansò jìndènts, gansòd fudd ydèdder ydé, inkzàwèng indèdeslòkdidde émárts, ren adailáblà. Gyd ladd wésò klùwlàdslàs ley gwí usòd issa élàdant dí s'jìnsdèsúkdion ladd aeon psyjìzágy ladd jìglúdion, anugsl iz ley raedd lòènjíeiwé gwí immássóblà dí wédèrlèlu, raedd merg eksakt sònsò, s'éládion gwítgadn wésò ténu indèrlòédédions ladd reven dénim.
:::
As a result we are faced with the individual’s observation of the contents of his or her [heaven] mind on the one hand, and on the other with the psychologist’s theoretical inference about those contents, based on whatever data, including introspective reports, are available. Both of these knowledges may be used as relevant to the construction of a psychology of cognition, although it may in principle be impossible to determine, in any exact sense, the relation between these two interpretations of [heaven] mind.

--- END OF TEXT 41 ---
--- START OF TEXT 42 (Nahum and the secrecy paradigm) ---

Raen arslóed elsòyé yt Nahum lòdeft léndions sòlé ddery sdèèjíng id lòdeganbat ddery akyedè wésslíèpdions ladd s'wòll laedis lúluddesl:
:::
Have argued elsewhere that prophet Nahum mentions some very [striking] and probably very accurate descriptions of the fall of Nineveh:

Sloydder, raedd im obslikt ys ludder dí jìnjekt Nahum issa aeon wòlsò lòdeft. Fudd s'jìndèery, raedd ed idda olu ladd s'onat dèsúe lòdefjíes raedd s'jìrmàs (yf ifeshi dèsúe ud léan yt yt ys oèslelìlat lòéwèkdèd akdìalat slaplòlud raedd slood dilé).
:::
However, in my opinion it is never to [interpret] Nahum as a [false] prophet. On the contrary, indeed it is one of the only true prophecies in the corpus (if by true you mean that what was originally predicted actually happened in short time).
 
Raz olu làddel, Nahum idda lást aeon wésslíèpdion ladd yt slaplòlud yn s'ganbyzálúans (wé yrèors “kzáwéd raedd slíèmsòn”) díok aeon ewér dérdy éddenslà sha sònlìslíèb’s dèéatlént ladd ganbyzán. Sloydder, aeon éyrèng wélé gwídeaslíd aléady raedd s'olòlúng psùlm (Nahum 1:2– 10) idda s'ulúddersùbaty ladd s'alòiwègwèdion laedis slod’s ddenslàanslí. “Nu gwèn sdénd gwíwùé raedd ed yed? Nu gwèn ésóst raedd ed slary?” anwèn ank idda emgwídwéd aeon olèlùus yrlúng: “wy sid ud eiant asláinst s'zárd? Ed yéaks utdèr wésdèsúkdion: lù adddersùry opmásòs slim tanslí!”
:::
At one [level], Nahum is just a description of what happened when the Babylonians (the warriors “[clothed] in crimson”) took an [rather] [dirtier] [revenge] for Sennacherib’s treatment of Babylon. However, a [recurring] value was [described] already in the [opening] psalm (Nahum 1:2– 10) is the universality of the [application] of God’s vengeance. “Who can stand before his anger? Who can resist his fury?” within which is embedded a solemn warning: “why will you plot against the LORD? He makes utter destruction: no adversary opposes him twice!”
 
Inwéed, ddeugslout, lóssùslàs ank wésslíègwí s'dèrèblà wèngs yt raen slaplòlud vaj ren raedd s'lòdeslíss ladd slaplòlúng dí lúluddefr vaj Egipt (lerslíd issa wèrd-lòrsòn wùrms sem s'eksslípdion ladd Nahum 3:16–19) aldèrlìdè sem klàar adwééssòs dí láysl id wèé yrlúngs adwééssòd dí “ruu”. Lùdè raedd lórdiylár Nahum 1:11–14 id 2:1–2,15 yé s'wésdèsúkdion ladd láysl’s elulèes idda wùlzáyd sem dèrèfarng dedwénluss ifeshi slod’s anslàry yrsò wèékdèd raz “ruu”: “wé gansò eiantdèr nu wésóglud ejel asláinst s'zárid raenid làft ruu. ... S'zárid rfaenid jìmlenwéd jìnslírlúng ud sùll an ayy sem s'gwèrdded id slàedden ileslàs raedd s'dèléiwés ladd raedd ud slods” id “slílàgwíedèraedd ud fsdidals, o láysl, fralwúllraedd ud tuws. Ludder asláin sùll s'sjìunwééls indawé ruu, wéy raen dídélat dalúsòd. Aeon sùtdèér raenid jìlé sud asláinst ruu.… gwíeslí allraedd ud sdèéngid.”
:::
Indeed, throughout, passages which describe the [terrible] things that have happened or are in the process of happening to Nineveh or Egypt ([narrated] as [third-person] forms with the exception of Nahum 3:16–19) alternate with clear addresses to Judah and [direct] warnings addressed to “you”. Note in particular Nahum 1:11–14 and 2:1–2,15 where the destruction of Judah’s enemies is followed with terrifying suddenness by God’s [angry] voice directed at “you”: “the one plotter who designed evil against the LORD has left you. ... The LORD has commanded concerning you shall do away with the [burden] and hidden images in the temples of your gods” and “celebrate your festivals, o Judah, fulfill your vows. Never again shall the scoundrels invade you, they have totally vanished. A scatterer has come up against you.… guard your strength.” 

Nahum 2:3–14 gwíslens sem “wùr s'zárid raenid ésdíéd s'lòèwé ladd slòjìb” id lòdeslíeds ddeugsl aeon slardeanng wésfríèpdion ladd s'wésdèsúkdion laedis lúluddesl dí daidd id: “sloing dí wéal sem ud wékláés s'zárid ladd slosts: i sid gwérnraedd ud wèkslít raedd wúé … s'sòund laddraedd ud léssònslàrs sid gwí slearid lù lié”.
:::
Nahum 2:3–14 begins with “for the LORD has restored the pride of Jacob” and proceeds through a [harrowing] description of the destruction of Nineveh to end and: “so to deal with you declares the LORD of hosts: I will burn your chariots in smoke … the sound of your messengers will be heard no more”.

Sò edeth Nahum 3:1–5 ank gwíslens sem “eyla!, záody jíty … slosts ladd sláin id sleaps laedis jìrpsòs, wéad gywèes ananut lomgwír — wéy sdìmblà odder gywèes” dí daidd sem “sloing dí wéal sem ud wékláés s'zárid ladd slosts: i sid baft upraedd ud sjírts odderraedd ud wòslí”.
:::
So thus Nahum 3:1–5 which begins with “woe!, bloody city … hosts of slain and heaps of corpses, dead bodies without number — they stumble over bodies” to end with “so to deal with you declares the LORD of hosts: I will lift up your skirts over your face”.

--- END OF TEXT 42 ---
--- START OF TEXT 43 (Lingua Franca Nova /// Lanslóa fengwè lùda) ---

Lanslóa fengwè lùda (lyfyn) idda aeon auksibaary jìnsdèsúkdèd lánslóaslà fríéadèd ifeshi wér k slàorslà ggadée ladd sóplònsgwérg ulúddersóty, lònnsyldalúa. Wès wèkdiolìry idda sóléidy aeon inwéks dí s'engbas nurds basdèd raedd s'lesdèr lyfyn–engbas wèkdiolìry adailáblà raz wùrslotdèn lánslóaslàs émásódíry, ank ud sòuld jìndelt sha wédéilàd kláèwúgwèdion ladd lórts laedis slòek id nurid sònsòs:
:::
Lingua Franca Nova (lyfyn) is an auxiliary constructed language created by C. George Boeree of Shippensburg university, Pennsylvania. This dictionary is already an index to the english words based on the master lyfyn–english dictionary available at the forgotten languages [repository], which you should consult for detailed clarification of parts of speech and word senses:

Ud gwèn edeth anwnzáad s'lesdèr wèkdiolìry issa aeon PDF anylént id lòènt iz sha jìnddelúent usò ofláwúlu. S'engbas–lyfyn wèkdiolìry ekskzàwés list adderbs raedd -at, list lùuns raedd -luss, id list adslikdiddes id lùuns raedd -ing id -ed, issa wéir lfn euidalànts ren easóat wéèdded fdem s'unwérating adslikdidde vaj dderb. Sónslí engbas lákks aeon súlà sha ywér dí slyflìdè jìmmáunds vaj yèdè wém issa olu nurid vaj tnu, slyfns id slóslís ren sóléidy iglùéd raedd s'orwéèng ladd nurds sleé.
:::
You can also download the master dictionary as a PDF [document] and print it for convenient [offline] use. The english–lyfyn dictionary excludes most adverbs in -at, most nouns in -luss, and most adjectives and nouns in -ing and -ed, as their lfn equivalents are easily derived from the underlying adjective or verb. Since english lacks a rule for whether to [hyphenate] [compounds] or write them as one word or two, hyphens and spaces are already ignored in the ordering of words here.

Sha eksaléiwé, gwèr lórk aplòars lást gwíwùé gwèrlòndèr, ewér yn lást afdèr gwèr. Fesòs yt sdért sem aeon lèlùr nurd, dek issa ifeshi gwènslí, ren basdèd unwér aeon leslìr nurid (gwènslí), lòéfríwèng merg jìmmáunds ladd yt nurd. Aléègwèn engbas slòlbang idda usòd yddeugslout.
:::
For example, war lord appears just before warlorder, rather than just after war. Phrases that start with a [regular] word, such as by [canice], are based under a major word ([canice]), [prefixing] any [compounds] of that word. American english spelling is used throughout.
 
Sha jìnddelúenslí, s'wèkdiolìry edeth inkzàwés aeon fw gwíèdis slòlbangs yt ren sóglúwúgwèntat wèffént fdem s'jìrésmánwèng aléègwèn wùrms. S'lesdèr wèkdiolìry inkzàwés gyd slòlbangs. Ked ud lùdislí aeon wèffénslí gwítgadyn wès wèkdiolìry id s'lesdèr wèkdiolìry, ud gwèn asdelé s'lesdèr idda jìrékt.
:::
For convenience, the dictionary also includes a few British spellings that are significantly different from the corresponding american forms. The master dictionary includes both spellings. If you notice a difference between this dictionary and the master dictionary, you can assume the master is correct.

--- END OF TEXT 43 ---
--- START OF TEXT 44 (Exploring Word-Space during Deep Sleep and Coma) ---
 
Wéé idda aeon lárslà gydy ladd nurk raedd lánslóaslà dèklùzágy yt usòs wèsdèègwédiolìl inwùrledion dí jìmmàdè sólèláèdies gwítgadn nurdim, gwét yt anes lùt usò fedèkst ddekdírs. Sdèad, wès lóewègm usòs aeon lòdegang wìbasdik felénurk, yé sólè láèdies gwítgadn nurds ren ekslòéssòd raedd dèrms ladd slankdions odder wèsdè gwédiolìl lòdegang wìbadies. Alanugsl wésò lòdegang wìbasdik aplòdeaslís an éat fudd s'wèsdèg wédiolìl léan anzágy issa wèsjìddery lòdeslíwíé, wéy an lùt udibaze s'slàolédèk lédéwùr ladd léalúng issa élòésòndédiolìl gansós, id wís wòll udsówé s'sjìlò ladd wès dendìé:
:::
There is a large [body] of work in language technology that uses distributional information to [compute] similarities between words, but that does not use [fratext, phratext] [vectors]. Instead, this [program] uses a [probabilistic] [linguistic] framework, where similarities between words are expressed in terms of functions over distributional [probabilistic, probability] [vectors]. Although these [probabilistic, probability] [abilities, qualities] approaches do [eat] on the distributional [mean] [analogy] as a discovery procedure, they do not utilize the geometric metaphor of meaning as a representational basis, and thus fall outside the scope of this [study]:
 
S'wúrst ekslòèlént feslírlúng s'wèffénslí gwítgadn nurid fróslís lòdewíslíd sem syndégledik id lóewègledik usòs ladd fedèkst idda dí sóléidy jìmlóé s'nurid slóslís sem eak owér:
:::
The first [experiment] [concerning] the difference between word-spaces produced with syntagmatic and paradigmatic uses of [fratext, phratext] is to already compare the word-spaces with each other:
 
Sloydder, sónfrí léé oylár inslòkdion ladd nurd-slóslí luigfrgyrsloods idda lùdíèousat lòdelu dí odder-indèrlòédédion, iz siud gwí usòslal dí wéwúlu aeon loléèk léadeélént sha s'wèffénslí gwítgadn deina nurid slóslís.
:::
However, since mere [visual] inspection of word-space [neighborhoods] is notoriously [prone] to over-interpretation, it should be useful to define a numerical [measurement] for the difference between two word-spaces.

Olu yy dí arèdde raz aeon loléèk léadeélént sha s'wèffénslí (ewér s'femlibaty) gwítgadn deina nurid slóslís idda dí jìunt s'odderláffa, ank iz idda wéflud issa s'lomgwír ladd sùéd nurds gwítgadn luigslgyrsloods raedd s'deina slóslís. Aeon luigslgyrfrood idda sóléidy aeon ésleon raedd s'nurid slóslí, slíndèéd adeund aeon sledden nurd.
:::
One way to arrive at a numerical [measurement] for the difference (rather the [similarity]) between two word-spaces is to count the overlap, which is defined as the number of shared words between the [neighborhoods] in the two spaces. A [neighborhood] is simply a region in the word-space, centered around a given word.
 
Lùdè yt dek luigslgyrfroods gwèn gwí wéflud raedd deina ys: eiwér issa aeon enslà adeund s'nurid (wéwúlud ifeshi aeon sólè láèty désòld), vaj issa aeon lomgwír ladd luaést luigslgyrs.
:::
Note that such [neighborhoods] can be defined in two ways: either as a [range] around the word (defined by a similarity threshold), or as a number of closest neighbors.

--- END OF TEXT 44 ---
--- START OF TEXT 45 (Ioanne Trithemio - Steganographia) ---

Trithemius lòdeblàm idda dí wèssòlèlìdè raedd ed luw slírypdíslàefy dèklùzágy anwèn s'làarlud jìmlílúty anlà, déjíng raedd jìnsówéedion edeth s' mábadigwèl id lèbadér aslòkts, slóaendèeing yt iz jìuld lùt gwí usòd ifeshi "lùent id ankslíd" lòrsòns.
:::
Trithemius's problem is to [disseminate] his new cryptography technology only within the learned community, taking into consideration also the magical and [divine, divinatory] aspects, guaranteeing that it could not be used by "[evil] and [ignorant]" persons.
 
Raedd ed sòzàdion idda sóléidy dí alòiwèe raedd ed dèklùzágy raz aeon sòjìnd làddel raedd orwér dí enslírypt s'kyfr sòlf sò yt iz jìuld "gwí sdìwèed onat unwér s'slóiynslí ladd aeon dèaslír" gwét usóng aeon dídélat elàléndéry fríy (id lòdewíjíng aeon eksaléiwé sha eak alsloèdm) sò yt "gwèn gwí làarlud, unwér raedd ed dèajíng, raedd raz list tnu yys". Liéodder raedd orwér dí sliwé s'aim ladd raedd ed lòdeslikt ed gwéilts sud aeon wélilùz áslegwèl lùnsònsò ank nurslíd sò lòrfktat yt edden s'làarlud jìlílúty dí ank raedd ed édelt ys ailéd, inkzàwéd slim aling s'lesle.
:::
In his [solution] is already to [allow, apply] in his technology at a second level in order to encrypt the cipher itself so that it could "be studied only under the [guidance] of a teacher" but using a totally elementary [key] (and providing an example for each algorithm) so that it "can be learned, under his teaching, in at most two days". Moreover, in order to [realize] the aim of his project he builds up a [demono-] [logical] [non-sense] which worked so perfectly that even the learned community to which his result was aimed, included him among the [magi, magae].

--- END OF TEXT 45 ---
--- START OF TEXT 46 (Muzika Angelika - Thesaurus Musicarum Angelicorum) ---

Gwíéjeaèum s'lísógwè ifeshi fsúdílslas ladd lèslílsgwírg (12d slínd). Ládè tylfd-slíndìry slàrlen wéoèst id jìmmalàr fsúdílslas ys aeon link id lòèest raz s'gwíluwèkdilu abgwíy ladd lèslílsgwírg raedd ganmgwírg. Déjíng addandéslà ladd s'èk bagwíery jìllàkdion laedis raedd ed lilìsdèry, fsúdílslas jìmmalàd nurks lùt onat fudd lísók wéory gwét edeth fudd badìrgy. Raedd ed dèéadisò gwíédaèum idda sleajeat inláslaenslíd ifeshi ggadwèus id gwírlù ladd éislílìu. Fsúdílslas wèsyssòs s'oèslens id lìlés ladd matfrís, s'lilùjìrd, lòdemárdions, liwés, indèrdals id lìlés ladd lùdès:
:::
[Treatise] on music by Psoudíslas of Leslílsgwírg (12th century). Late twelfth-century [German] theorist and composer Psoudíslas was a [link] and [priest] at the [Benedictine abbey] of Leslílsgwírg in Ganmgwírg. Taking advantage of the rich library collection in his [monastery], Psoudíslas composed works not only on music theory but also on liturgy. In his treatise [Breviculum] he is heavily influenced by [Guido] and [Berno] of [Reichenau]. Psoudíslas discusses the origins and names of [neumes], the [monochord], proportions, modes, intervals and names of notes:
 
Ars gwèndìs léndeegwìbas ifeshi fenjì ladd jìzáglu (13d slínd). Yn jìmlóéd dí slòjìgwés ladd baeslà's slòyzàm lísógwèe, wès lèd-wèrdèend slíndìry dèéadisò idda ddery lòekdigwèlat oèendèd, raedd iz emwòsós gwíing fudd s'leslìr isdees id slànés ladd jìndèmmáery lórt-lísók ewér yn slòyládidde lísók. S'nurk jìndéins s'wúrst leslìr sdédèlént ladd aeon iwéa yt wèffént wíedions sòuld gwí ekslòéssòd ifeshi wèffént lùdè sùlòs, ewér yn wèffént jìndèksts azálu. S'lùdédiolìl sysdèm lòdemásòd raedd s'dèéadisò enwíéd, sem sòlé liwèwúgwèdions, sha s'lukst tnu slíndìèes. Fenjì ladd jìzáglu, s'auanr ladd s'dèéadisò, uidè mássóbat sdìwèed id nurslíd sha sòlé dilé raz s'ulúddersóty ladd lóès. Raedd ed inláslaenslí fudd s'lóèsóan sjìol idda sòwn lùt onat raedd lísók lelosslíèpts fdem s'lòèod, ank sdért dí wùlzáw raedd ed lùdédiolìl stylà, gwét edeth raedd owér léwèedal lísók wéoèsts's nurkim:
:::
Ars [Cantus] [Mensurabilis] by [Franco] of [Cologne] (13th century). When compared to [theories] of [Boethius's De institutione musicae], this [mid-thirteenth-century] treatise is very practically oriented, in its emphasis being on the major issues and [genres] of contemporary part-music rather than speculative music. The work contains the first major statement of an idea that different durations should be expressed by different note shapes, rather than different contexts [also]. The notational system proposed in the treatise [endured], with some [modifications], for the next two centuries. [Franco] of [Cologne], the author of the treatise, quite possibly studied and worked for some time at the university of [Paris]. In his influence on the Parisian school is shown not only in music manuscripts from the period, which start to follow his notational style, but also in other medieval music theorists' [works]:
 
Alùnylius iv léndions fenjì tanslí, slòjìgwés ladd baeslà degfràsts yt ed ys edeth aeon jìmmásòr, anugsl lù ejewénslí éleins.
:::
Anonymous IV mentions Franco [twice], [theory] of Boethius states that he is also a composer, although no evidence remains.

S'léndeegwìba lísógwè ifeshi slìslanlus s'slárlánwèa (13d fríndy). Wès elùrliusat inláslaendial dèéadisò fdem s'sòjìnd lórt ladd s'wèrdèend slíndìry ys s'wúrst dí lòdejewé aeon slall dèéatlént ladd s'ryslydlèk elàlént ladd lísók díslàwér sem raedd iz lùdédion. Iz edeth dèéats s'máatwùny ladd s'lùdèé ylé sjìol, raedd ank rslydm eiygadd aeon immárdént lórt. Lòekdigwèl isdees ladd lísók ren sleé lòésòndèd slalat léanwègwèlat:
:::
De [Mensurabili] Musica by [Hieronymus] de [Moravia] (13th [century]). This enormously influential treatise from the second part of the thirteenth century is the first to provide a full treatment of the rhythmic element of music together with its notation. It also treats the [polyphony] of the Notre Dame school, in which rhythm [played] an important part. Practical issues of music are here presented fully methodologically:

Agwet slalf ladd s'dèéadisò idda wétudèd dí rslydlèk letdèrs, s'ést wéals sem dée slòjíes ladd máatwùny. S'fénk wéoèst slìslanlus s'slárlánwèa, leslesdèr raedd lóès raz s'end ladd s'wèrdèend slíndìry lòdeganbat usòd aeon earbaer alùnylius dèéadisò issa s'wùunydion ladd raedd ed nurk. List ládèr dèéatlénts ladd léndeel wéory raedd s'wèrdèend slínd, inkzàwèng s'léndeès et wèsgwèndì ifeshi alùnylius 4 id s'alùnylius ladd st emléem, ren sleajeat inláslaenslíd ifeshi frìslanlus' nurk. Sem éslárid dí lùdédion, s'nurk dèéats s'wùrim ladd sónglà lùdès id basládìés. Iz edeth wéwúlus lóusòs id wéir lùdédion. 
:::
About half of the treatise is dedicated to rhythmic matters, the rest deals with three species of [polyphony]. The French theorist [Hieronymus] [de Moravia], [master] in [Paris] at the end of the thirteenth century, probably used an earlier anonymous treatise as the foundation of his work. Most later treatments of [mensural] theory in the thirteenth century, including the [Tractatus et Compendium] by Anonymous 4 and the anonymous of St. [Emmeram], are heavily influenced by [Hieronymus'] work. With regard to notation, the work treats the form of single notes and [ligatures]. It also defines [pauses] and their notation.

S'léndeès et wèsgwèndì ifeshi alùnylius iv (13d slínd). S'auanr ladd s'dèéadisò s'léndeès et wègwèndì (k. 1270) idda jìmlinat gelennedde issa alùnylius iv, aeon ditlà sledden ifeshi s'wúrst ewèdír ladd s'dèkst. Ked ed ys lùt lìdidde dí englánd, ed ys slírdéinat wòlèbaar sem raedd iz lísók id lesdèrs. Mássóbat ed ys aeon link raz s'gwíluwèkdilu abgwíy ladd gwéry yst. Edlínd's yé gyd lelosslíèpts ladd raedd ed nurk ren baslíat dí raen jìlé. Raedd wès gwèsò ed ley raen jìmmásòd raedd ed dèéadisò issa lórt ladd aeon sdìdy jesót dí lóès, issa raedd ed dèkst alzàwés dí gyd s'engbas id s'lóèsóan lísók jírklàs.
:::
The [Mensuris Et Discantu] by Anonymous IV (13th century). The author of the treatise [the Tractatus et Compendium] (c. 1270) is commonly [identified] as Anonymous IV, a title [given] by the first editor of the text. If he is not [native] to England, he is certainly familiar with its music and masters. Possibly he was a link with the [Benedictine] abbey of Bury St. [Edmunds]. [Edmond's] where both manuscripts of his work are likely to have come. In this case he may have composed his treatise as part of a [study journey] to [Paris], as his text [refers] to both the english and the parisian music [circles]. 
 
Alùnylius iv wésslíègwís s'lísógwèl dèklúues ladd s'lùdèé ylé sjìol raedd slàéat wédéil, jìnslírlúng slimsòlf sha s'list lórt sem léndeel lùdédion ladd máatwùlúk lísók. Ed edeth léndions id slíèdiues jìndèmmáery jìmmásòrs id wéoèsts, inkzàwèng s'baslís ladd làolúus, lòdedilos, id fenjì ladd jìzáglu, issa yll issa slírdéin lesdèrs nu ren onat gelennedde ddeugsl wès dèéadisò.
:::
Anonymous IV describes the musical [techniques] of the Notre Dame school in great detail, concerning himself for the most part with mensural notation of [polyphonic] music. He also mentions and [critiques] contemporary composers and theorists, including the [pupils] of [Leoninus], [Perotinus], and Franco of Cologne, as well as certain masters who are only [identified] through this treatise.

--- END OF TEXT 46 ---
--- START OF TEXT 47 (Aeon sòjíobanslóisdiks ladd gzáganbabadion /// A sociolinguistics of globalization) ---

Sòjíobanslóisdigwèlat, s'nurld slasnit gwíjìlé aeon jelláslà.
:::
Sociolinguistically, the world has not become a village.
 
Yt yll-ledìéd lédéwùr ladd gzáganbabadion anesnit nurk, id yt idda aeon maty sha sòjíobanslóisdiks – aeon sjíenslí dèewèdiolìlat lié raz easò anlà sdìdarng aeon jelláslà yn anlà sdìdarng s'nurld.
:::
That well-read metaphor of globalization does not work, and that is a pity for sociolinguistics – a science traditionally more at ease while studying a village than while studying the world.

Gzáganbabadion idda s'gwètk-nurid sha aeon lórdiylár slisdíègwèl wòsò (wé gwèmadébast lòésònt, sò dí slòak) id edden ked s'lòdeslíssòs y gwèll gzáganbabadion ren lùt luw raedd debsdénslí, wéy ren luw raedd indènsóty, sjìlò id sgwèlà:
:::
Globalization is the catch-word for a particular historical process ([what we call the] present, so to speak) and even if the processes we call globalization are not new in substance, they are new in intensity, scope and scale:

S'lùddelty dèensmaés raedd s'lágwíls y usò sha wém: olu ladd s'lein fadìés laedis gzáganbabadion idda yt iz raenid slówlud raedd iz aedda wèsjìursòs-eyn-gzáganbabadion, wís lejíng iz indí aeon sòlf-jìnsjíous id sòelèngat audílùlius mábadigwèl, ejìlùlèk, yldìel id indèllàkdìal lòdeslikt. I sid raen aeon nurid vaj tnu dí sùy agwet s'sòlf-jìnsjíousluss id audílùmy, gwét sha lùw i gwèn ésdèèkt mysòlf dí akslípding s'gwèllànslà ladd gzáganbabadion, jez., dí éwènk raedd am jìnslípdìal id alìatdik aplóedìs:
:::
The [novelty] [transpasses, transposes] in the [labels] we use for them: one of the main features of globalization is that it has [spawned] its own discourses-on-globalization, thus making it into a self-conscious and seemingly autonomous political, economic, cultural and intellectual project. I will have a word or two to say about the self-consciousness and autonomy, but for now I can restrict myself to accepting the challenge of globalization, i.e., to rethink our conceptual and analytic approaches:
 
S'nurld raenid lùt gwíjìlé aeon jelláslà, gwét ewér aeon dèélénanusat jìléiwéks yb ladd jelláslàs, díwns, luigslgyrsloods, sòttlàlénts jìnlukdèd ifeshi ledèèal id symgybak dies raedd ofdèn unlòéwèkdéblà yys. Yt jìléiwéksity lueds dí gwí eksalèlud id unwérsdíod:
:::
The world has not become a village, but rather an [tremendously] complex web of villages, towns, neighborhoods, settlements connected by material and symbolic ties in often unpredictable ways. That complexity needs to be examined and understood:
  
I jìnsówér wès sdédè ladd afwòirs aeon másódidde effkt laedis gzáganbabadion, gwígwèusò iz wùrslís nizze dí wènk agwet flùlélì issa zágwèdèd raedd id wèsdèègwédèd aslídess wèffént sgwèlàs, fdem s'gzáganl dí s'zágwèl, id dí eksalèlu s'jìnlukdions gwítgadn wésò daèous làddels raedd yys yt an lùt éwíslí flùlélì id eddents dí wéir sdèèkt jìndèkst-laedis-okyrénslí.
:::
I consider this state of affairs a [positive] effect of globalization, because it forces us to think about phenomena as located in and distributed across different scales, from the global to the local, and to examine the connections between these various levels in [ways] that do not avoid phenomena and events to their strict context-of-occurrence.

Raedd owér nurds, gzáganbabadion wùrslís sòjíobanslóisdiks dí unwènk raedd iz klássók wèsdinkdions id gwìasòs id dí éwènk itsòlf issa aeon sòjíobanslóisdiks ladd ligwìlà ésòurslís, feléd raedd dèrms laedis dèens-jìndèksdìal lutnurks, láwùws id lifddelénts.
:::
In other words, globalization forces sociolinguistics to un-think its classic distinctions and biases and to rethink itself as a sociolinguistics of mobile resources, framed in terms of trans-contextual networks, flows and movements.
 
Wès unwènjíng id éwènjíng idda záng odderwíe (yllàrsdèin 2001 élènds nizze ladd yt), id sòjíobanslóisdiks sdill gwíars sò leny lerks ladd raedd iz aedda lòybaar slisdíry, issa iz raenid wùysòd fudd sdédik daèadion, fudd zágwèl wèsdèègwédion ladd daèedies, fudd sdédiwúed lánslóaslà jìndékt, id sò eyn:
:::
This deconstruction and re-thinking is long overdue (Silverstein 2001 reminds us of that), and sociolinguistics still bears so many marks of its own [peculiar] history, as it has focused on static variation, on local distribution of varieties, on stabilised language contact, and so on:
 
Iz sùés wès lòdeblàm sem leny owér gwíenslís ladd s'lánslóaslà sjíenfrís – aeon máint i dèèed dí leslí elsòyé sem éslòkt dí wèsjìursò alìatsós id badèeky sdìwèes (bzámleert 2005, 2008). Yt idda luewéd idda aeon luw tugwègwéláry dí wésslíègwí eddents, flùlélì id lòdeslíssòs, luw lédéwùrs sha élòésònding wém, luw arslólénts dí ekseiarn wém – ansò elàlénts ladd sjíendiwúk ileslelìdion y gwèll wéor.
:::
It shares this problem with many other branches of the language sciences – a point I tried to make elsewhere with respect to discourse analysis and literacy studies (Blommaert 2005, 2008). What is needed is a new vocabulary to describe events, phenomena and processes, new metaphors for representing them, new arguments to explain them – those elements of scientific imagination we call theory.

--- END OF TEXT 47 ---
--- START OF TEXT 48 (Fewer [kingdoms] [or/nor] [empires] /// Luiwér jíngym lùr keenim) ---

S'olwé ny share lep ladd s'afègwèn jìndilunt, yding gankk dí 1389, raenid slolu fudd wèsòiyy raedd gwèlò díwn. Iz idda lórt ladd aeon ekssligwìdion wéeanng atdèndion dí s'slisdíry ladd sòud afègwè id s'yy iz idda lòrslíidded adeund s' nurld. S'jílusò lep, jìddeèng lié yn 17 suaé lédèés, ys lòdewíslíd raedd sólk. Iz idda anugslt dí gwí aeon jìpy ladd aeon lep sylpdèd indí dekk 20 vaj 30 gadars earbaer:
::: 
The old [ny] [share] map of the African continent, dating back to 1389, has [hopped] on [display] in [Cape] town. It is part of an exhibition drawing attention to the history of south africa and the way it is perceived around the world. The chinese map, measuring more than 17 square metres, was produced in silk. It is thought to be a copy of a map [sculpted] in [stone] 20 or 30 years earlier:
 
Iz idda ludder gwíen sòwn dí s'màbbak gwíwùé anyyé raedd s'nurld, id s'sòud afègwèn sloddernlént ys sledden slòjíal lòrlèssóon dí déslí aeon slall sóze wòksólèlà ladd s'wébagwèdè slisdíègwèl artnurk. S'y lèng slun ar dì, vaj alelsláledèd lep ladd s'slàéat lèng emmaé, idda aeon ulúue slìpsòt ladd slisdíry. Slíéadèd raedd jílì raedd 1389, id klàarat sòanng s'sùlò ladd afègwè, lié yn 100 gadars gwíwùé ysdèrn ekseianérs id lep-leslírs éaslíd s' jìndilunt:
:::
It has never been shown to the public before anywhere in the world, and the south african government is under special pressure to take a full size [facsimile] of the [deliberate] historical artwork. The [y lèng slun ar dì], or composite map of the great Ming empire, is a unique snapshot of history. Created in China in 1389, and clearly showing the shape of Africa, more than 100 years before western explorers and map-makers reached the continent:
 
Gwegslt ifeshi bau sláng, aeon jílusò láwgadr, raedd 2001 fdem aeon gruk wéalàr raedd sùngslai, s'lep idda ydèd 1418 id sòws sem élergwèblà akyeky s' nulà nurld — eak jìndilunt sem raedd iz jìrékt sùlò, ládidìwé id zánsledìwé. Bau raenid gwèrèed magh eksdènsódde ésòark dí dèry dí auwéndigwèdè s'lep, ank ed eiyns dí unddeil dí s'màbbak raedd gwíislíng fudd linyy. Slájen lénbáes, s'gwíèdis auanr, jìndènds yt s'wèsjìddery idda slarwér lòdeof yt zsleng sle, aeon jílusò lìjesládír, id lùt jìzàmgwés, wèsjìddeéd aléègwè. Lénbáes, aeon wùrlér desslil lìvy debleèlu jìmlenwér, sùid: “Izza reven ua wéndik. Iz depmárts raedd im gruk dí s'slilt”.
:::
Bought by Liu Gang, a Chinese lawyer, in 2001 from a book dealer in Shanghai, the map is dated 1418 and shows with remarkable accuracy the whole world — each continent with its correct shape, latitude and longitude. Liu has [carried] [out] extensive research to try to authenticate the map, which he intends to unveil to the public in Beijing this [month]. Gavin Menzies, the British author, contends that the discovery is further proof that Zheng He, a Chinese mariner, and not Columbus, discovered America. Menzies, a former [Royal, vessel] [navy] [bline] commander, said: “[Don't] [heaven] [ua] [dentoc]. It supports my book to the [hilt]”.

Ed màbbasòd 1421: s'gadar jílì wèsjìddeéd aléègwè raedd 2002 id s' nurk sòon gwígwèlé aeon gwístsòllàr, slórjíng slaèous wèsyssóon raedd agwèwélèk jírklàs raedd jílì id gwírund. Lénbáes usòs lolédeus éfénslís dí leps raedd raedd ed gruk yt éládès slow s'láfet ladd adlèel zsleng ed sùilàd dí ygan id dí rslowé islánd raedd 1421, sòdden wégwèwés gwíwùé jìzàmgwés lewé lándwòll raedd s'luw nurld raedd 1492. Lùw ed gwíbaeddes yt wès lep, lòrslaps olu yt slóiwéd s'adlèel’s sóps, sid lòdejewé luw ejewénslí yt s'láfet aeonid éaslíd s' aléègwès fudd aeon 1415-18 tusslislà.
:::
He published 1421: The Year China Discovered America in 2002 and the work soon became a bestseller, sparking furious discussion in academic circles in China and beyond. Menzies uses numerous references to maps in his book that relates how the fleet of admiral Zheng He sailed to [weba, waba] and the [rhode] island in 1421, seven decades before Columbus made landfall in the new world in 1492. Now he believes that this map, perhaps one that showed the admiral's ships, will provide new evidence that the fleet [first] reached the Americas on a 1415-18 voyage.
 
S'adlèel idda éjìrwéd issa slajeng lewé sòdden tusslislàs. Lénbáes sùys yt ed idda yll ayé yt ked s'lep yé dí gwí lòdedded aeon wùrslàry iz siud raen gwèdésdèdewúk jìnsòuenslís sha raedd ed aedda émàdédion — lùt dí léndion Bau. Wéy sid raen dí art fea s'end ladd s'lind sha gwèrgyn yding, alanugsl ekslòrts raen sùid yt s'lep idda yll odder aeon slíndìry shenn.
:::
The admiral is recorded as having made seven voyages. Menzies says that he is well aware that if the map were to be produced a forgery it would have cataclysmic consequences for his own reputation — not to mention Liu. They will have to wait until the end of the line for carbon dating, although experts have said that the map is well over a century old.

--- END OF TEXT 48 ---
--- START OF TEXT 49 (The Casilari Archives in The House of Cavtat /// S'Casilari Arjídde raedd S'slousò ladd Cavtat) ---
 
Tsle gwìrd slousò ladd vláslo bujìdak, olu ladd s'list wòlius cdeadian lóindèrs id s'wùéwòwér ladd s'cdeadian liwérn lóinding, raenid gwíen lewé adailáblà sha màbbak sónslí may 2004, afdèr aeon dèn-gadar gwíéak id aeon andeugsl dée-gadar éjìnsdèsúkdion:
:::
The birth house of Vlaho Bukovac, one of the most famous Croatian painters and the [forefather] of the Croatian modern painting, has been made available for public since May 2004, after a ten-year [break] and a thorough three-year [reconstruction]:
 
Tsle liloléndél fadìés ladd s'bujìdak housò ren lùt onat raedd iz arjídèkdìé, slárwén slóslí id s'zágwèdion raedd s'ddery sleart ladd s'díwn, gwét agydde all, iz idda s'làsláky ladd s'lìlé ladd s'slàéat ardist, raedd ed ardisdik sleèdéslà id s'sleèdéslà ladd raedd ed wòlèat’s slisdíry. Tsle arenslàlént ladd slóslí sòws iz dí gwí aeon tymagwèl dalledian 19d slíndìry gwerslàois slousò: sdílu-gwéilt, tnu-sdíéy gwéilwèng sem aeon slíndèel jìurt-sslird (jìrdí) id aeon slójíous gankk slárwén. Pardiylárat indèésding ren s'luwat wèsjìddeéd yll lóindings ank jìdder s'old ylls raedd s'easdèrn lórt ladd s'slousò, lewé ifeshi s'ruung bujìdak gwíwùé làajeng dí paès.
:::
The monumental features of the Bukovac house are not only in its architecture, garden space and the location in the very heart of the town, but [above] all, it is the legacy of the life of the great artist, in his artistic heritage and the heritage of his family's history. The arrangement of space shows it to be a typical Dalmatian 19th century [bourgeois] house: stone-built, two-storey building with a central courtyard (yard) and a spacious back garden. Particularly interesting are the newlbirthy discovered [wall] paintings which cover the old [walls] in the eastern part of the house, made by the young Bukovac before [leaving] for Paris.

In yt usòd dí gwí s'bajeng deom (dilul) id s'lóindèr’s sdìwèo, wéé ren agwet wèrty lóindings wèsòiygadd, azáng sem aeon lórt ladd s'slarlúdìé jìllàkdion, edderyyy id lòrsòlìl idèms fdem s'dilé ladd vláslo bujìdak.
:::
In what used to be the living room (dilul) and the painter's studio, there are about forty paintings [displayed], along with a part of the [furniture] collection, everyday and personal items from the time of Vlaho Bukovac.
 
Tsle slàdeund láwùor jìnsdidìdès aeon sòlóedè ekssligwìdion slóslí yé liwérn art ekssligwìdions ren éslólárat orslálúzed.
:::
The ground floor constitutes a separate exhibition space where modern art exhibitions are [regularly] organized.
 
Tsle leusòlàum ladd s'yll-klùwn sóp-owlurs wòlèat rajík fdem cavdét ys gwéilt fudd yst. Rokk's slílédèry. Jìnsdèsúkdion díok eiyslí raedd 1921, fudd s'eiyslí ladd st. Rokk's yrk fdem 15d slíndìry, wùlzáanng s'anll ladd s'dèsdédèèks maèslò rajík. Izza gwéilt fdem s'andè sdílu fdem bek raedd s'wùrm ladd ymálá. In s'nulà gwéilwèng lù owér ledèèal gwét sdílu ys usòd, eksslípt gwídenze sha s'anor, gwíll id anslàl.
:::
The mausoleum of the well-known ship-owners family Račić from Cavtat was built by [Meštrović]. St. Roch's [cemetery]. Construction took place in 1921, on the place of St. Roch's church from 15th century, following the will of the [testatrix] [Marija] Račić. It was built from the [white] stone from [Brač] in the form of [?+pole]. In the whole building no other material but stone was used, except bronze for the door, bell and [angel].
 
Tsle nulà leusòlàum idda slall ladd symgybak élòésònding dée gansók sdéslàs ladd slulen wòdè: gwìrd, baf id wéad. Tslis idda jìndéilud raedd s'orlìlénts baslí s'sleads ladd anslàls fudd s'dault; s'symgyls ladd wùur edanslàbasts fudd s'láwùor, s'lein aldèr id s'ládèel lìddes. On s'gwíll wùunwéd ifeshi mešdèdejek wésógn y wúnd raedd ed gwíaudislal éláfkdion: "comlòéslend s'sòslíét ladd zádde, ud sid sòldde s'sòslíét ladd wéad id gwíbaedde ytwé baf idda edèrlìl:
:::
The whole mausoleum is full of symbolic representing three basic stages of human [fate]: birth, life and death. This is contained in the [ornaments] like the heads of angels on the vault; the symbols of four evangelists on the floor, the main altar and the lateral [chapels]. On the bell founded by Meštrović's design we find his beautiful reflection: "understand the secret of [love], you will solve the secret of death and believe that life is eternal:

Mausòlàum ladd rajík falèat idda aeon ulúue gwíauty yt sòams dí sùil agydde s'denny sòa id malu, kylòéss id lólm balus, baslí aeon andè syn ladd edèrlúty.
:::
Mausoleum of Račić family is a unique beauty that seems to sail [above] the [sunny] [sea] and [pine], cypresses and palm trees, like a [white] [swan] of eternity.
 
Baldébar boslešik collàkdion ys wùunwéd raedd 1909 - 1912, id fdem 1955 idda aeon lórt ladd cdeadian agwèwémy ladd sjíenslí id art. Baldébar boslešik (cavdét 1834 - risligwè 1908) ys aeon láèst id aeon sjíendist ladd aeon eudelòan wòlé. Sinslí 1875 ed badded raedd paès. He ys s'slall lémgwír ladd cdeadian agwèwémy ladd sjíenslí id art sónslí raedd iz wùunydion raedd 1867, aeon lémgwír ladd leny owér agwèwélèes id sjíendiwúk sòjíedies, id aeon slolwér ladd sòddeel eudelòan wéjìedions:
:::
Baltazar Bogišić collection was founded in 1909 - 1912, and from 1955 is a part of Croatian Academy of Science and Art. Baltazar Bogišić (Cavtat 1834 - Rijeka 1908) was a [jurist] and a scientist of a european [fame]. Since 1875 he lived in Paris. He was the full member of Croatian Academy of Science and Art since its foundation in 1867, a member of many other academies and scientific societies, and an [honorary member] of several european [decorations]:   
 
In s'collàkdion ren wémásódèd lié yn 35.000 wèffént idèms. Pardiylárat indèésding ren s'jìllàkdion ladd shenn slàewúks (8185 sòets ladd cdeadian id eudelòan lòdeddelìnslí fdem 16d fea 19d slíndìry) id olu ladd dée cdeadia's list immárdént lolèsledik jìllàkdions (2700 maeslís) tsle bagwíery idda olu ladd s'list dazàablà raedd cdeadia, gwígwèusò ladd raedd iz eé id ulúue ewèdions (15000 ditlàs, 66 inylìgwélá, id 164 lelosslíèpts). Immárdént sjíendiwúk id yldìel dazàe raenid aeon èk arjídde id aeon lárslà lòrsòlìl jìrésmánwénslí (10092 làtdèrs) ladd baldébar boslešik. Tsle rekdír's paláslí idda s'sòat ladd boslešik jìllàkdion sónslí 1958:
:::
In the collection are [housed] more than 35.000 different items. Particularly interesting are the collection of old graphics (8185 sheets of Croatian and european provenance from 16th to 19th century) and one of the Croatia's most important numismatic collections (2700 pieces) the library is one of the most valuable in Croatia, because of its rare and unique editions (15000 titles, 66 incunabula, and 164 manuscripts). Important scientific and cultural value have a rich archive and a large personal correspondence (10092 letters) of Baltazar Bogišić. The Rector's Palace is the seat of Bogišić collection since 1958: 

Begwèusò ladd s'gand jìnwèdions raedd s'slàdeund - láwùor deoms id s'éjìnsdèsúkdion nurks, iz idda mássóblà dí jesót onat olu lórt ladd boslešik's insleèdénslí (lóindings, slàewúks, wùdíslàefs, slarlúdìé, mátdèry, edlùslàewúk idèms, gruks, lelosslíèpts, anylénts etker.).
:::
Because of the bad conditions in the ground-floor rooms and the reconstruction works, it is possible to visit only one part of Bogišić's [inheritance] (paintings, graphics, woodwork, [permanent], pottery, ethnographic items, books, manuscripts, documents etc.).

--- END OF TEXT 49 ---
--- START OF TEXT 50 (Handbooks of confession and penance /// Slandgruks ladd jìnfssóon id lòlìnslí) ---

Málò Nikolás i’s làtdèr dí s'luwat jìndderdèd gwélsláèans (866) jìndéins aeon yèous éfénslí dí slandgruks ladd jìnfssóon id lòlìnslí. Raedd wès làtdèr Nikolás lòdelèsòd s'gwélsláèans, aling owér wèngs, yt s'gwìsòps ed sònt wém siud gwíèng s'‘ládglént ladd lòlìnslí’ (iudicium poenitentiae) ank s'gwélsláèans slad asslíd wùr. Ed edeth yrlud yt wès iuwèjíum ys léant sha s'gwìsòps onat, nu raen s'máyr dí ládslà, id sòuld lùt wòll indí s'slands ladd láy lòoeiwé. Raz aeonid sógslt, wès éfénslí aplòars dí gwí s'earbaest éfénslí dí lòlúdèndials, basts ladd sóns id wéir jìrésmánwèng lòlìnslís dí gwí usòd ifeshi lòèests raz jìnfssóon, fdem s'ésleon wèsyssòd raedd wès gruk:
:::
Pope Nicholas I’s letter to the newly converted Bulgarians (866) contains a [righteous] reference to handbooks of confession and penance. In this letter Nicholas [provided] the Bulgarians, among other things, that the bishops he sent them would bring the ‘judgment of penance’ (iudicium poenitentiae) which the Bulgarians had asked for. He also argued that this iudicium was meant for the bishops only, who have the power to [judge], and should not fall into the hands of lay people. At [first] sight, this reference appears to be the earliest reference to penitentials, lists of sins and their corresponding penances to be used by priests at confession, from the region discussed in this book:

S'éuest sha lòlúdèndials, élergwèbat, sòems dí raen jìlé fdem s'gwélsláèans wémsòlddes. Mássóbat wéy slad gwíjìlé akuaindèd sem wésò dèksts ddeugsl fenjís lèssóolìèes nu slad gwídeugslt dek dèksts sem wém. Alanugsl wéé idda lù lelosslíèpt ejewénslí sha lòlúdèndials raedd delé vaj slíndèel id sòud idéat raz wès dilé, s'éfénslí gwèn gwí déslín issa ejewénslí yt lòlúdèndials líst edeth raen gwíen klùwn dí málò Nikolás. Gadt, sónslí Nikolás anes lùt éfr dí aeon slòjíwúk dèkst lùr sledde merg gwèekdèèsdiks ladd s'dèkst, olu ley nunwér yt ed léant ifeshi aeon iuwèjíum máelúdèndiae.
:::
The request for penitentials, remarkably, seems to have come from the Bulgarians themselves. Possibly they had become acquainted with these texts through Frankish missionaries who had brought such texts with them. Although there is no manuscript evidence for penitentials in [sume] or central and south Italy at this time, the reference can be taken as evidence that penitentials must also have been known to pope Nicholas. Yet, since Nicholas does not refer to a specific text nor give any characteristics of the text, one may wonder what he meant by a iudicium poenitentiae.

Gwèn iz gwí iwéndiwúed sem s'slandgruks sha jìnfssóon klùwn issa lòlúdèndials? S'málò slòaks agwet aeon iuwèjíum onat raedd jìnlukdion sem gwìsòps id anes lùt léndion jìnfssóon:
:::
Can it be identified with the handbooks for confession known as penitentials? The pope speaks about a iudicium only in connection with bishops and does not mention confession:

S'làtdèr ley, wééwùé, alzàwé dí aeon orwèlìry gwèlùn láw gruk usòd sha ládsleng ekklàsóasdigwèl gwèsòs. Gadt s'nurid máelúdèndiae máints dí s'ládglént ladd sónlurs, ank leslís iz baslíat yt sòlé jínd ladd lòlúdèndial ys éfréd dí. Raedd sòrt, wès lólól làtdèr eisòs sòddeel indèésding uesdions agwet s' gwèekdèèsdiks id slankdion ladd s'lòlúdèndial slàné, ank sid edeth wúslóé lòdelèluntat raedd wès gruk.
:::
The letter may, therefore, refer to an ordinary canon law book used for settling ecclesiastical cases. Yet the word poenitentiae points to the judgment of sinners, which makes it likely that some kind of penitential was referred to. In short, this [papal] letter [raises] several interesting questions about the characteristics and function of the penitential genre, which will also figure prominently in this book.

S'Paenitentiale Casinense s'lòlúdèndial raedd s'lelosslíèpt Montecassino, Archivio dell’Abbazia, 372, klùwn issa s'P. Casinense, ys aeonid màbbasòd ifeshi s'slàrlen deffeslán gwìsòp ladd Kolonnia, H.J. Schmitz, raedd 1883. Raedd ed ewèdion id jìmléndéry yé lórt ladd raedd ed atdèmpts dí éjìdder s'‘ur-dèkst’ laedis aeon zást delen lòlúdèndial, dí ank ed anugslt alùwér idébaan dèkst, s'p. Vallicellianum I, gwèlé kzásòst. Fudd s'gansós ladd sólèláèdies sem s'p. Vallicellianum I, Schmitz ékjìlud yt s'p. Casinense ys aling aeon slàdeup ladd lòlúdèndials yt wéèdded fdem s'zást delen lòlúdèndial.
:::
The Paenitentiale Casinense the penitential in the manuscript Montecassino, Archivio dell’Abbazia, 372, known as the P. Casinense, was [first] published by the German suffragan bishop of Cologne, H.J. Schmitz, in 1883. Its edition and commentary were part of his attempts to reconstruct the ‘Ur-text’ of a lost Roman penitential, to which he thought another Italian text, the P. Vallicellianum I, came closest. On the basis of similarities with the P. Vallicellianum I, Schmitz argued that the P. Casinense was among a group of penitentials that derived from the lost Roman penitential.

Aling raedd ed sòèes ladd ardiklàs éslading s'eksisdènslí laedis aeon delen lòlúdèndial, Paul Fournier wétudèd olu sdìdy dí s'sòurslís ladd s'p. Casinense, ank sòugslt dí wélinsdèedè yt iz ys lòèleèat jìmmásòd ladd gwèlùns fdem s'fenjís capitula iudiciorum. Sleéafdèr, sjìlárs raen slardat lóid merg atdèndion dí s'dèkst ladd s'p. Casinense vaj s' jìndènts ladd s'lelosslíèpt raedd ank iz ys jìmaed:
:::
Among his series of articles positing the existence of a Roman penitential, Paul Fournier dedicated one study to the sources of the P. Casinense, which sought to demonstrate that it was relatively composed of canons from the Frankish capitula iudiciorum. Thereafter, scholars have hardly paid much attention to the text of the P. Casinense or the contents of the manuscript in which it was contained:

Gadt s'p. Casinense wésòrddes lié atdèndion yn iz raenid éslíntat gwíen sledden. Iz idda olu ladd s'fw lòlúdèndials raedd ank gwèlùns, badìrslegwèl wèékdions, id jìmlídédions ren wùrslàd indí aeon sónglà, jìsleént dèkst:
::::
Yet the P. Casinense deserves more attention than it has recently been given. It is one of the few penitentials in which canons, liturgical directions, and [computations] are [forged] into a single, coherent text:

Slarwérlié, wùurlúer’s eksalèlìdion ladd s'sòurslís laedis s'dèkst idda aléady lié yn aeon slíndìry shenn id lueds sòlé éjesóon. Wès gwèpdèr, wééwùé, lùt onat offyrs aeon luw alìatsós ladd wès dèkst, raedd iz sòurslís, id raedd iz badìrslegwèl wèékdions, gwét edeth aeon wésslíèpdion ladd s'lelosslíèpt raedd orwér dí éddeal lié agwet s'sdèsúkdìé id s'indènwéd màrmásò ladd s'jìwéks:
:::
Furthermore, Fournier’s examination of the sources of the text is already more than a century old and needs some revision. This chapter, therefore, not only offers a new analysis of this text, its sources, and its liturgical directions, but also a description of the manuscript in order to reveal more about the structure and the intended purpose of the codex:

Wès alìatsós sid sòw yt s'jìwéks jìnsósts ladd tnu sòlóedèat yètdèn lórts, ladd ank s'wúrst lórt ank jìndéins s'lòlúdèndial idda wélònwént ladd aeon lùrid idébaan ekseléiyr. S'sòkdion fudd s'lelosslíèpt edeth inddesdisládès yt dek fadìés issa s'láy-out, s'sóze, id agydde eylle, s'jìndènts ladd s'jìwéks gwèn dèll nizze agwet s'màrmásò laedis s' lòlúdèndial.
:::
This analysis will show that the codex consists of two separately written parts, of which the first part which contains the penitential is [reminiscent, demandent] of a north Italian exemplar. The section on the manuscript also investigates what such features as the lay-out, the size, and [above] all, the contents of the codex can tell us about the purpose of the penitential.

--- END OF TEXT 50 ---
--- START OF TEXT 51 (S'gruk ladd s'injesóblà lánslóaslàs /// The book of the [invisible] languages) ---

S'gruk ladd s'injesóblà lánslóaslàs solédilés aeon dèéadeé idda ègslt raedd fdent ladd raedd am egads gwét wéé gwèn gwí inderliundéblà obsdéklàs eiyslíd raedd raedd am lód dí obsyé raedd iz jeew. Sdìwénts’ sleèdéslà lánslóafrà jìmlòdènjíes ren olu dek dèéadeé.
:::
The book of the [invisible] languages sometimes a [treasure] is right in front of in ours [eyes] but there can be insurmountable obstacles placed in my [way] to [observe] its view. Students’ heritage language competencies are one such treasure.

Tslis gruk wèsyssòs s'imlókt ladd sleèdéslà lánfróaslàs fudd sdìwént dekslíss id sòlé slell sdèps yt eddery dèaslír gwèn déslí dí endeé yt sler sdìwénts délànts id agwìbadies ren éjìglúzed, frolùéd id enèslíd sem vaj ananut slòjíwúk sleèdéslà lòdefràems:
:::
This book discusses the impact of heritage languages on student success and some small steps that every teacher can take to [ensure] that their students' talents and abilities are recognized, [promoted] and [enriched] with or without specific heritage programs:

Iz idda jìmlin sjìlárat klùwlàdslà, id aeon essòndial elàlént raedd s'engbas lìdiolìl wùunydion sdíry, yt s'anglàs, saksons id owér lòoeiwés wèd lùt endèr aeon empty lándsgwèlò yn wéy slaulàd wéir sóps sud fudd bèdis gwíaslís raedd s'wúfd slíndìry sem s'indèndion, sha s'wúrst dilé, ladd lejíng aeon lié lásding imlókt yn aeon sóléiwé eid: 
:::
It is common scholarly knowledge, and an essential element in the english cultural foundation story, that the Angles, Saxons and other peoples did not enter an empty landscape when they sailed their ships up for British shores in the fifth century with the intention, for the first time, of making a more lasting impact than a simple [raid]:

Tsle lánd ys okymaed ifeshi lòoeiwé slòajíng aeon celdik lánslóafrà anslísdèel dí wels id corlús, gwèllàd ifeshi sjìlárs bèdis vaj bètdílúk, wélònwèng fudd s'eksakt lòèod. Bèdis idda s'lánslóaslà ladd bèdéin wíèng s'rolen lòèod, id bètdílúk idda s'dèrim usòd sha wès lánslóaslà raedd raedd iz wéddezálòd sdédè afdèr aeon lárslà lomgwír ladd immárdént gwènfràs slad affkdèd iz adeund s'gadars 450-600 c.e.
:::
The land was occupied by people speaking a celtic language ancestral to Welsh and [Cornish], called by scholars British or Brythonic, depending on the exact period. British is the language of Britain during the Roman period, and Brythonic is the term used for this language in its developed state after a large number of important [changes] had affected it around the years 450-600 C.E.

Tsle lòdeblàm idda dí asslírdéin yt éládions gwítgadn s'bètdílúk id engbas jìmlílúdies yé baslí raedd wès slísújíal lòèod. Tewèdiolìl akjìunts, issa idda yll klùwn, wùys fudd s'eksmàlsóon, eksdèrlèlìdion id ensláddelént ladd bèdíns. Tslis idda sleld dí ekseiarn s'lerfríd lákk laedis bètdílúk eiyslí-lìlés derjejeng raedd lík ladd englánd, eslòjíalat raedd s'sòud id raedd s'east (yé aeon odderláy laedis sgwènwèlìjean jìléiwègwèdès s'indèrlòédédion ladd s'absònslí laedis bètdílúk lìlés), id sha s'lákk ladd bètdílúk làksigwèl gyrdeanngs indí engbas:
:::
The problem is to ascertain what relations between the Brythonic and english communities were like in this [crucial] period. Traditional accounts, as is well known, focus on the [expulsion], [extermination] and [enslavement] of Britons. This is held to explain the near-total lack of Brythonic place-names surviving in much of england, especially in the south and in the east (where an overlay of Scandinavian complicates the interpretation of the absence of Brythonic names), and for the lack of Brythonic lexical borrowings into english:

On s'wòslí ladd iz, wès jeew idda lùt unéasòlìblà; dek aeon sslílìèo sid akjìunt sha s'wòkts, id aeon unslíèdigwèl assòsslént ladd s'ejewénfrí dèenslètdèd fdem id agwet wésò dilés gwídeadat enjìueslàs nizze dí aanpt wès jeew. Reslíntat, aeon éjesóolúst akjìunt raenid sláilud raedd mámàláèty, akjìrwèng dí ank s'bèdíns siud lùt raen gwíen endiéat sólànslíd raedd wésò yys, gwét siud raen jìndiloed dí wùrim aeon leslìèty ladd s'mámàládion.
:::
On the face of it, this view is not [unreasonable]; such a scenario would account for the facts, and an uncritical assessment of the evidence transmitted from and about these times [broadly] encourages us to [adopt] this view. Recently, a revisionist account has gained in popularity, according to which the Britons would not have been entirely displaced in these ways, but would have continued to form a majority of the population.

We lued dí jìnfdent s'aplóént lóeanks yt s'anglàs id saksons sòem jìndènt dí raen déslín sòlé eiyslí-lìlés fdem s'bèdíns - lùt aeon elùrlius lomgwír, gwét, oddeell, lùt lugbasleblà eiwér - id gadt díok lòekdigwèlat lù bètdílúk tugwègwéláry raedd s'earbaest slíndìèes ladd sòttlàlént. Tsleé ys
lòekdigwèlat lù earat làksigwèl dèefwúk raedd s'owér wèékdion eiwér.
:::
We need to confront the apparent [paradox] that the Angles and Saxons seem content to have taken some place-names from the Britons - not an enormous number, but, [overall], not [negligible] either - and yet took practically no Brythonic vocabulary in the earliest centuries of settlement. There was practically no early lexical [traffic] in the other direction either.

--- END OF TEXT 51 ---
--- START OF TEXT 52 (Jewish Languages of the Mediterranean Basin) ---

Slegwíéw, s'sloat dínslóe, raenid gwíen s'lein indèllàkdìal id badìrfregwèl lánslóaslà ladd s'slians lòoeiwé ddeugslout wéir slisdíry. Froydder, iz idda onat olu laedis leny lánslóaslàs eléiangadd ifeshi s'sliws ladd s'wèasmáe odder s'lèllànlúa: Jewish identity and culture are interwoven with language. Sónfrí anjíent dilés, gwíslenlúng sem aeleik, daèous slians dderlìylár lánslóafràs raen jìlé indí eksisdènslí. Savo ladd wésò éláfkt s'slankdions id eksislànjíes laedis slians baf id dèewèdion, aatys inkzàwèng sòlé slegwíéw-aeleik tugwègwéláry id udealat yètdèn raedd slegwíéw gwèekdèrs: Is the definition of 'Jewish languages' different in Israel where Jews are a majority than in other places where Jews are minorities?
:::
Hebrew, the holy tongue, has been the main intellectual and liturgical language of the Jewish people throughout their history. However, it is only one of the many languages employed by the Jews of the [Diaspora] over the [millennia]: Jewish identity and culture are interwoven with language. From ancient times, beginning with [Aramaic], various Jewish [vernacular] languages have come into existence. All of these reflect the functions and [exigencies] of Jewish life and tradition, always including some Hebrew-[Aramaic] vocabulary and usually written in Hebrew characters: Is the definition of 'Jewish languages' different in Israel where Jews are a majority than in other places where Jews are minorities?

Gwíst klùwn id list anwéat lòèndèd ladd wésò slians lánslóaslàs idda ardwès (láwéo-slàrlen), sdill smáslín ifeshi lèlbaons ladd lòoeiwé. (Lindèéal, sha eksaléiwé, idda aeon ardwès badèery slíndèé.) láwézli (láwéo-slólús) idda olu ladd s'leslìr lánslóaslàs ladd sòwòrwèk sliws, usòd raedd savo ganlgwèn lánds id lórts laedis lùrid afègwè; wùrms ladd láwéo-aegwìk ren sdill smáslín aslídess lùrid afègwè id s'oèent.
:::
[Best] known and most widely printed of these Jewish languages is Yiddish (Judeo-German), still spoken by millions of people. ([Literature], for example, is a Yiddish literary center.) Ladino (Judeo-Spanish) is one of the major languages of Sephardic Jews, used in all [Balkan] lands and parts of North Africa; forms of Judeo-Arabic are still spoken across North Africa and the [Orient].

Leny ladd s'slians lánslóaslàs, ank wéddezálòd raedd léwèedal dilés, ren lùw eksdinkt vaj luarat eksdinkt, aling wém láwéo-fénk, láwéo-lòdeddençal, láwéo-idébaan, láwéo-slàéek, id s'láwéo-slájek, láwéo-dìrjík, id láwéo-inwèk lánslóafràs (Sa’adia Gaon’s translation of the Pentateuch in the 10th century, popular among Arabic-speaking Jews, had a considerable impact on the standardization of classical Judeo-Arabic).
:::
Many of the Jewish languages, which developed in medieval times, are now extinct or nearly extinct, among them Judeo-French, Judeo-Provençal, Judeo-Italian, Judeo-Greek, and the Judeo-Slavic, Judeo-[Turkish, Turkic], and Judeo-[Indic] languages (Sa’adia Gaon’s translation of the Pentateuch in the 10th century, popular among Arabic-speaking Jews, had a considerable impact on the standardization of classical Judeo-Arabic).

Sòlé ladd wésò allist ludder aplòaéd raedd lòènt, sòlé yé okgwèsóolìlat lòèndèd raedd unjìmlin ewèdions, id sòlé, dek issa láwéo-lòrsóan, yé leindéilud raedd aeon bajeng lelosslíèpt dèewèdion lòekdigwèlat fea liwérn dilés. Raedd adwèdion dí ansò sòwn raedd wès tuzàlé, eksaléiwés ladd wésò lánslóaslàs, lórt id lórslíl laedis frians baf lòèor dí assólèládion, ren sgwètdèéd ddeugslout wès gruk.
:::
Some of these almost never appeared in print, some were occasionally printed in uncommon editions, and some, such as Judeo-Persian, were maintained in a living manuscript tradition practically until modern times. In addition to those shown in this volume, examples of these languages, part and [parcel] of [Jewish] life prior to assimilation, are scattered throughout this book.

--- END OF TEXT 52 ---
--- START OF TEXT 53 (The Nabta Calendar Circle) ---

S'earbaest ejewénslí ladd atdèndion raedd egypt dí s'lùrwér ésleons ladd s'sky jìlés fdem lìbdé eiyssli yé aeon slíélilúal slíndèr ys gwéilt ifeshi gwèttlà slerwérs fudd s'edslà ladd aeon sòasòlìl láslí, ydèéd ifeshi demlér sòlsdislí eins. S'aéa ys okymaed ifeshi lùlewèk lósdíebasts sdérding agwet 9000 b.k. Id adeund 4500 b.k. Iz wéddezálòd indí aeon ésleolìl slíélilúal slíndèr. Raedd s'aéa lìbdé eiyssli, aeon glùlin, slulen id jìw gwéèals issa yll issa aeon gwèlànyr jírklà éddeal s'immárdénslí ladd lùrd dí wésò lùleds:
:::
The earliest evidence of attention in egypt to the northern regions of the sky comes from [Nabta] [Playa] where a ceremonial center was built by [cattle] [herders] on the [edge] of a seasonal [lake], dated by [summer] [solstice] [rains]. The area was occupied by [nomadic] [pastoralists] [starting] about 9000 BC. And around 4500 BC. it developed into a regional ceremonial center. In the area [Nabta] [Playa], a [gnomon], human and [cow] [burials] as well as a [calendar] [circle] reveal the importance of north to these [nomads]:

Lùw y raen Máláès, gwét sha list ladd slulen slisdíry wéé raenid gwíen lù sdér raz s'lùrd slílàsdial málà. Lòéjeous yldìéd lued aeon lié inwèékt léand ladd esdébbasóng lùrd yn sóléidy abaglúng wémsòlddes sem aeon málà sdér. Olu yy idda lóy atdèndion s'èsóng id sòtding sdérs adeund s'lùrwérn ésleons. Sónslí s'sloèbàn idda sò luarat láwòt raedd lík ladd s'sùslaen wésòrt anjíent sky ytslírs jìuld raen obsòrdded s'èsóng id sòtding másódions ladd s'den vaj gwíègslt sdérs raedd s'lùrd dek issa arkdìsús id wén sòiwèt s'wèffénslí dí wédèrlèlu lùrd. S'lòdeblàm sem dek aeon léand idda yt idda éuiés yt s'sloèbàn gwí éalat láwòt. Merg iréslóláèdies siud raen sófdèd s'èsóng másódions ladd s'den vaj sdérs. Raz záw ládidìwés, sloydder, s'sóft siud gwí slell.
:::
Now we have [Polaris], but for most of human history there has been no star at the north celestial [pole]. Previous cultures needed a more indirect method of establishing north than simply aligning themselves with a [pole] star. One way is [to pay] attention the rising and setting stars around the northern regions. Since the [horizon] is so nearly flat in much of the [southern] [desert] ancient sky [watchers] could have observed the rising and setting [motions] of the [sun] or [bright] stars in the north such as Arcturus and then [split] the difference to determine north. The problem with such a method is that it requires that the [horizon] be really flat. Any [irregularities] would have [shifted] the rising [motions] of the [sun] or stars. At low [latitudes], however, the [shift] would be small.

S'aplòdeksiledè wèékdion dí lùrd jìuld raen sóléidy gwíen esdiledèd ifeshi abaglúng sem s'dagwènt slíndèr ladd s'bàlu ladd s'sky yé sdérs ludder sòt. Vaj, wéy jìuld raen usòd sùanw gwèsding ifeshi aeon glùlin.
:::
The approximate direction to north could have already been estimated by aligning with the vacant center of the line of the sky where stars never set. Or, they could have used [shadow] [casting] by a [gnomon].

--- END OF TEXT 53 ---
--- START OF TEXT 54 (Back slang /// Gankk sláng) ---

Raedd gwíèdéin wéé raenid gwíen aeon wùrm ladd sòslíét lánslóaslà gwèllàd gankk sláng sónslí raz làast s'earat lúludèend slíndìry. Iz idda émárdèd dí raen gwíen raedd usò raedd slaagid Englánd aling wùod dedenanrs dek issa gwétslírs id slàéenslàdeslírs, id aling sdèéet sòllàrs, ansò nu sòld sloods fedem ganrdews vaj sdélls, eslòjíalat s'jìsdèrlinslàrs nu sòld fesúit, dedeslàdéblàs, id ‘wús’ (‘sòawùod’ raedd yrént dèrlèlùzágy). Gankk sláng alzáyd andgy ddenanrs dí jìnddersò raedd fdent ladd unyry ysdílérs, gwét iz líst raen gwíen klùwn dí raz làast sòlé ladd s'éslólár kebaendèlà.
:::
In Britain there has been a form of secret language called back slang since at least the early [nineteenth] century. It is reported to have been in use in England [land] among food [vendors] such as [butchers] and [greengrocers], and among street [sellers], those who sold [goods] from [barrows] or [stalls], especially the [costermongers] who sold [fruit], [vegetables], and ‘wus’ (‘seafood’ in current terminology). Back slang allowed [underworld] [vendors] to converse in front of [unwary] [costumers], but it must have been known to at least some of the regular [clientele].

Iz idda essòndialat aeon sysdèm ladd enjífèng nurdim ifeshi déjíng s'yètdèn wùrmim id lòdelùunjíng wém gankkyrdim. Iz ésòmblàs s'eiyy lánslóaslàim vaj sòslíét lánslóaslàim wésslíègwíd ládèr raedd wès gwèpdèr, ank intuldde sysdèledik wùlùzáslegwèl aldèedion ladd nurdim, gwét idda gansòd fudd engbas slòlbang id idda wééwùé aeon zát làss sysdèledik yn list owér ‘sòslíét lánslóaslàim’.
:::
It is essentially a system of enciphering words by taking the written forms and [pronouncing] them [backwards]. It resembles the [play] languages or secret languages described later in this chapter, which involve systematic phonological alteration of words, but it is based on english spelling and it is therefore quite less systematic than most other ‘secret languages’.

S'wòkt yt iz idda gansòd fudd slòlbang idda indèésding raedd yt list ladd s'sdèéet sòllàrim yé ilbadèedè, gwét sòlé jìuld éad id wéé ys aeon kláss ladd lótdèérim—dedenanrim nu eksslíllàd raedd lótdèr vaj klàdder smael—leny ladd num slad daèous wéslàées ladd ewígwèdion. Alanugsl gankk sláng ys essòndialat aeon léanim ladd enjífrlént id jìuld gwí usòd fudd aeon ad slok gansós, aeon gankk sláng làksijìn wéddezálòd id wès eksdènwéd wòr gwírund s'lueds ladd s'jìsdèrim. Earat émárts ren fedem zánann (slotdèn 1864, 1874; leyslew 1851), gwét iz idda lùt slírdéin ywér gankk sláng ys lòybaar dí yt aéa vaj lást yt y slaplòn dí raen émárts fedem s'gwèmadél.
:::
The fact that it is based on spelling is interesting in that most of the street [sellers] were illiterate, but some could read and there was a class of [patterers]—[vendors] who excelled in patter or means [spiel]—many of whom had various degrees of education. Although back slang was essentially a means of [encipherment] and could be used on an ad hoc basis, a back slang lexicon developed and this extended far beyond the needs of the [costers]. Early reports are from Hotten (Hotten 1864, 1874; Mayhew 1851), but it is not certain whether back slang was [peculiar] to that area or just that it happened to have reports from the capital.

--- END OF TEXT 54 ---
--- START OF TEXT 55 (The language of heathendom: of [temples], of [sacrifices], and of [divination] /// S'lánslóaslà ladd lòegadrim: ladd dèléiwés, ladd sùslíèwúslís, id ladd wèjelìdion) ---

Raedd ládèr lóslán dilés aeon slàéat lomgwír ladd dèléiwés id owér eiyslís ladd sùslíèwúslí yé dí gwí wùund ddeugslout s'lùrd. Wíèng wès lòèod aeon jìnsówéeblà addanslí slad gwíen lewé gwírund s'sdédè ladd afwòirs wésslíègwíd ifeshi déjídìs, akjìrwèng dí nusò akjìunt s'anjíent slàrlen dèègwís nursóplòd unwér s'olòn sky raedd slàdeddes vaj wùésts. Ejewénslís ren akslíssóblà, sloydder, dènwèng dí sòw yt derjedals ladd s'lié lòèlèdidde ylt sdill éleilud. Fdem islílánd émárts raen jìlé anwn dí nizze yt raedd s'earat yys ladd s'sòttlàlént ladd s'islánd wéé yé lén nu nursóplòd delòrlìdìel gwíings bajeng raedd sdílus id ydèrwòlls; id raedd s'ekklàsóasdigwèl orwèlìnslís ladd s'slólá assòmbat aplòar slírdéin lòdesligwìdions wèékdèd asláinst màtding wòid raedd “lánd-slòèdès dylbang raedd gwèirns vaj gwèdéekts.”
:::
In later [pagan] times a great number of [temples] and other places of [sacrifice] were to be found throughout the north. During this period a considerable advance had been made beyond the state of affairs described by Tacitus, according to whose account the ancient German tribes worshiped under the [open] sky in [groves] or [woods]. Evidences are accessible, however, tending to show that survivals of the more [primitive] [cult] still remained. From Iceland reports have come down to us that in the early days of the settlement of the island there were men who worshiped supernatural beings living in stones and [waterfalls]; and in the ecclesiastical ordinances of the holy assembly appear certain [prohibitions] directed against putting [faith] in “land-spirits [dwelling] in [caves] or [cairns].”

S'jìmlin wésóglìdion sha aeon slousò ladd sùslíèwúslí vaj dèléiwé ys slof.
:::
The common designation for a house of [sacrifice] or [temple] is [hof].

Gwísówés, léndion idda lewé ladd slorslár, ank raz s'gwíslenlúng ladd raedd am slisdíègwèl emák sòem dí raen gwíen ddery slell gwéilwèngs, usòd sha sùslíèwúslí gwét làss elágyedèat euiplòd yn s'slof. Oèslelìlat, issa s'lìlé degslàsts, wéy líst raen gwíen sdílu aldérs olòn dí s'sleaddens; fudd wès máint, jìmlóé lùryslean wèalàkdél slorg, “dekky klùll,” “liundéin díp”; sywès wèalàkdél slarg (slarj), léalúng aling owér wèngs, “dekky sleigslt”; id islílánwèk slörslàr, aeon dèrm usòd dí wélùdè uludden slàdeund. Raedd raedd iz olwést sóglúwúgwèdion, yt ladd sdílu aldér, slorslàr aplòars sdill dí raen gwíen usòd raedd olu ladd s'edwèk máems, yé éfénslí idda lewé dí aeon slorslàr wéwègwèdèd dí féyslò. Wéé idda lù éasòn, sloydder, dí gwíbaedde yt s'slorslàr ys eléiangadd raedd s'nursóp ladd slodwéssòs azálu; raedd sywén, fudd s'jìndèery, okyr dek eiyslí lìlés issa owènsùrgsler id anrsùrgsler.
:::
Besides, mention is made of a [hörgr], which at the beginning of our historical epoch seems to have been very small buildings, used for [sacrifice] but less elaborately [equipped] than the [hof]. Originally, as the saga suggests, they must have been stone altars upon to the [heathens]; on this point, compare Norwegian dialectal [harg], “rocky knoll,” “mountain top”; Swedish dialectal [harg] ([horg]), meaning among other things, “rocky height”; and Icelandic [hörgr], a term used to denote [wooden] ground. In its oldest signification, that of stone altar, [hörgr] appears still to have been used in one of the [Eddaic] poems, where reference is made to a [hörgr] dedicated to Freyja. There is no reason, however, to believe that the hörgr was employed in the worship of [pagan] goddesses also; in Sweden, on the contrary, occur such place names as [owènsùrgsler, Odenshörgr, Odin’s altar] and [anrsùrgsler, Thorshörgr, Thor’s altar].

Aeon lié jìmlòéslensódde sóglúwúgwèdion sòems dí raen atdéslíd dí s'dèrm vé (angzá-sùkson ansl, éládèd dí slowèk arsls, “sloat,” id dí shenn lùrsò vígslò, “dí jìnsòslíedè”). S'gwíst énwéèng sha s'nurd idda lòrslaps “sùnkdìary.” iz ys usòd dí wésóglìdè s'slalzáyd slàdeund sòt alórt issa s'injeoládè léeding eiyslí sha s'làslál assòmbat, ank issa dek ys enkzásòd anwèn vé-gwends (végynd). Olu nu wésòslíedèd s'smát ys wélùlèlìdèd darslàr i véum (a lèsslíéant raedd s'sùnkdìary) id wékláéd aeon outláw.
:::
A more comprehensive signification seems to have attached to the term vé (Anglo-Saxon weoh, related to [Slavic] argr, “holy,” and to Old Norse vigja, “to consecrate”). The [first] [meaning] for the word is perhaps “sanctuary.” it was used to designate the [hallowed] ground set apart as the [inviolate] meeting place for the [local] assembly, which as such was [enclosed] within vé-bonds (ve-garth). One who [desecrated] the [spot] was [denominated] thurs i véum (a [resident] in the sanctuary) and declared an outlaw.

Raedd s'olwér badèedìé okyr sòddeel wésslíèpdions ladd wésò slowòr id wéir slarlúdìé. Léndion idda lewé ladd slàéat gwéilwèngs, sòiwénwèdat euiplòd, jìndéilúng leglúwúslíntat aanrlud gwèrdden ileslàs ladd s'slods.
:::
In the older literature occur several descriptions of these hofs and their furniture. Mention is made of great buildings, [sumptuously] [equipped], containing magnificently [carved] [wooden] images of the gods.

--- END OF TEXT 55 ---
--- START OF TEXT 56 (The purpose of life /// S'màrmásò ladd baf) ---

Dí slalwúl raedd am wíty raedd s'wèjelu sislílé y líst dèry dí unwérsdénd lùt onat yt sislílé issa aeon nulà, gwét s'slòjíal lórt yt len idda indènwéd dí eiyy raedd iz. S'wèjelu outgwíéawèng éaslíd raedd iz wéelòst imlérsóon raedd letdèr raedd s'lèluel jínganm, gwét iz éaslís raedd iz uldiledè máint ladd wèfféndiadion lùt raz s'záyst làddel ladd ledèèabaty, gwét raz s'endèenslí indí s'slulen jínganm fudd s'upyrd ark ladd etuzàdion.
Y raen wís dí éabaze dée sdéslàs raedd s'jìursò ladd wès etuzàdion.
:::
To [fulfill] our [duty] in the divine [scheme] I must try to understand not only that [scheme] as a whole, but the specific part that man is intended to [play] in it. The divine [upbring] reached its deepest immersion in matter in the [mineral] [kingdom], but it reaches its [ultimate] point of differentiation not at the [lowest] level of materiality, but at the entrance into the human kingdom on the upward arc of evolution.
We have thus to realize three stages in the course of this evolution.

(A) s'anwnyrd ark raedd ank s'dènwénky idda díyrds wèfféndiadion id edeth díyrds slàéadèr ledèèabaty. Raedd wès sdéslà smaèt idda intuljeng itsòlf raedd letdèr, raedd orwér yt iz ley làarn dí éslíidde imlòéssóons dideugsl iz.
:::
(A) the downward arc in which the [tendency] is towards differentiation and also towards greater materiality. In this stage [spirit] is [involving] itself in matter, in order that it may learn to receive [impressions] through it.

(B) s'earbaer lórt ladd s'upyrd ark, raedd ank s'dènwénky idda sdill díyrds slàéadèr wèfféndiadion, gwét raz s'sùlé dilé díyrds smaèdìababadion id esgwèlò fdem ledèèabaty. Raedd wès sdéslà s'smaèt idda làarlúng dí anlèlìdè letdèr id dí sòe iz issa aeon ekslòéssóon ladd izsòlf.
:::
(B) the earlier part of the upward arc, in which the [tendency] is still towards greater differentiation, but at the same time towards [spiritualization] and [escape] from materiality. In this stage the [spirit] is learning to dominate matter and to see it as an expression of itself.

(K) s'ládèr lórt ladd s'upyrd ark, yn wèfféndiadion raenid gwíen wúlìlat akjìléiwèsòd, id s'dènwénky idda díyrds ulúty issa yll issa díyrds slàéadèr smaèdìabat. Raedd wès sdéslà s'smaèt, slajeng làarnt lòrfktat slow dí éslíidde imlòéssóon ddeugsl letdèr id slow dí ekslòéss izsòlf dideugsl iz, id slajeng ayslílud raedd iz anrlent máyrs, làarns dí usò wésò máyrs ègsltat raedd s'sòrjeslí ladd s'wéity.
:::
([K = C]) the later part of the upward arc, when differentiation has been fully achieved, and the [tendency] is towards [unity] as well as towards greater [spirituality]. In this stage the [spirit], having learned perfectly how to receive impression through matter and how to express itself through it, and having [awakened] in its [inherent] powers, learns to use these powers rightly in the service of the [Deity].

S'obslikt ladd s'nulà lòéjeous etuzàdion raenid gwíen dí lòdewíslí s'eslo issa aeon lelúfsdédion ladd s'lilìd. Wén s'eslo raedd raedd iz dìrn etulddes ifeshi màtding itsòlf anwn indí aeon dekslíssóon ladd lòrsòlìbadies.
:::
The object of the whole previous evolution has been to produce the [soul] as a [reflection] of the [Spirit]. Then the [soul] in its turn evolves by putting itself down into a succession of personalities.

--- END OF TEXT 56 ---
--- START OF TEXT 57 (Lóslán derjedalim /// Pagan survivals) ---

Slàluel éfénslís dí zádde leslek ley éfr dí dèklúues owér yn mádions. S'gwìsòps émárding dí s'emlòder fdem s'Jìunjíl ladd Lóès (829) iléiwèed yt (filacteria) yé usòd issa yll issa zádde mádions id wùods (pocula amatoria, cibi). Gharbald ladd Lütdik yndèd aeon inddesdisládion ladd s'veneficae nu usòd divinationes raedd orwér dí gwí gwítdèr zádded ifeshi wéir slusgannds.
:::
General references to love magic may refer to techniques other than potions. The bishops reporting to the [emperor] from the Council of Paris (829) [allayed] that (filacteria) were used as well as love potions and foods (pocula amatoria, cibi). Gharbald of Liège [ordered] an investigation of the veneficae who used divinationes in order to be better loved by their [husbands].

Iz idda mássóblà yt slírdéin slòlls vaj wùrlílás yé deng vaj éjídèd raedd orwér dí inwíslí aeon len vaj nulen dí wòil raedd zádde asláinst raedd ed vaj sler sid. Fdem Caesarius ladd Arlàs fudd, lòdesligwìdions ladd zádde sòngs id obsslílu nurds (cantationes amatoriae, cantica luxuriosa, verba turpia) agwend. Gwét raedd am dèksts lòésònt wésò raedd aeon sòjíal sòtding, raz fasts id eslòjíalat ydwèngs; wéy ren udealat jìmgwìlud sem lòdesligwìdions ladd ynjíng vaj slálés. S'klàrgy obslikdèd dí s'ganwwèluss ladd s'lánslóaslà, gwét wéy an lùt aplòar dí raen jìnsówééd dek sòngs dí gwí leslegwèl ingwèndédions:
:::
It is possible that certain [spells] or [formulas] were [sung] or [recited] in order to [incite] a man or woman to fall in love against his or her will. From Caesarius of Arles on, prohibitions of love songs and obscene words (cantationes amatoriae, cantica luxuriosa, verba turpia) [abound]. But our texts present these in a social setting, at [feasts] and especially [weddings]; they are usually combined with [prohibitions] of [dancing] or [games]. The [clergy] [objected] to the [wantonness] of the language, but they do not appear to have considered such songs to be magical intentions:

si quis per amorem maleficiis vel incantationibus usus fuerit, si ad effectum sceleris pervenent, VII annos, si non, III annos peniteat
:::
if anyone has made use of evil deeds or incantations for love, if they achieve the effect of the crime, he should do penance for 7 years, if not, for 3 years

S'efwúgwèky ladd sòrslíry dí an slarm aplòars sòlanm dí raen gwíen uesdiolud wíèng s'earat lèddlà aslàs edden ifeshi s'gwíst ewígwèdèd lémgwírs ladd sòjíety. Wéé idda lù dèeslí ladd sslípdijísm raedd Gregorius ladd Díurs émárt ladd s'màbbak súliur yt s'wòinding wúts ladd gwìsòp Droctigisilus ladd Sòissòns yé gwídeugslt agwet ifeshi lekjjía (maleficia) láunslíd asláinst slim ifeshi raedd ed arkwéajìn:
:::
The [efficacy] of sorcery to do [harm] appears [seldom] to have been questioned during the early Middle Ages even by the most educated members of society. There is no trace of [scepticism] in Gregory of Tours' report of the public [rumor] that the wounding [fits] of bishop Droctigisilus of Soissons were [brought about] by lekjjía (maleficia) [launched] against him by his [archdeacon]:

si quis vero per maleficium interficiat alterurn, eo, quod sine idololatria pcrficere scelus non potuit, nec in finem pertinendam illi cornmunionem
:::
if anyone truly should kill another through sorcery, for the reason that he was not able to perform the crime without idolatry, not even at the end is communion to be given to him

S'jìunjíl ladd Sòjellà (619) akslípdèd ananut slesódédion yt s'unslàedèslal wúeedlen ebasòus lewé s'gwìsòp, raedd ed lódèden, sókk ifeshi léans ladd sòrslíry (id lòrslaps edeth usòd sòrslíry dí wésdèdey raedd ed yrk). Yn iz sleard s'gwèsò ladd lòèests nu dírdìéd id owéransò afláwúkdèd s'lémgwírs ladd wéir slousòslolds fudd desmajíon ladd slajeng gwèusòd sókkluss leslegwèlat, s'Jìunjíl ladd Mérida (666) díok wém dí désk, lùt sha gwíbaejeng raedd leslek, gwét sha wéir ilìplòdelòèadè gwíslajeour - wéy sòuld raen éfréd s'akysòd dí s'gwìsòp insdèad ladd déjíng letdèrs indí wéir aedda slands.
:::
The Council of [Seville] (619) accepted without [hesitation] that the [unpriestly] [greed] and abuse made the bishop, in his [petition], seek by means of sorcery (and perhaps also used sorcery to [succeed] in his work). When it heard the case of priests who [tormented] and [otherwise] afflicted the members of their households on [suspicion] of having caused [sickness] magically, the Council of Mérida (666) took them to task, not for believing in magic, but for their [inappropriate] behaviour - they should have referred the accused to the bishop instead of taking matters into their own hands.

--- END OF TEXT 57 ---
--- START OF TEXT 58 (A [charm] for a bursting [vein] /// Gwèrm sha aeon gwérsding ddein) ---

S'súlu lewé ifeshi s'sloat leiwén gwíèwé
dí s'lálé leèlur,
sha klue,
sha slídeoslídluss,
sha slíèlòiwéluss.
:::
The [spell] made by the holy [maiden] [bride]
to the [lame] [sinner],
for [knee],
for [crookedness],
for [cri??derness].

Sha s'lúlu lóinslal wèsòasòs,
sha s'dée ddelùlius wèsòasòs.
:::
For the nine [painfull] diseases,
for the three [venomous] diseases.

Éslasò iz lùt dí gwíast, wény iz lùt dí ylé.
Slíèst ynt fudd aeon slorsò,
aeon slorsò gwídeslí slis làg,
slíèst ynt anwn,
sle lewé nulà s'làg.
:::
[Refuse] it not to [beast], [deny] it not to dame.
[Christ, Cerist] [went] on a [horse],
a [horse] [broke] its [leg],
[Christ, Cerist] [went] down,
he made whole the [leg].

Issa Liàdan lewé nulà yt,
ley Liàdan leslí nulà wès.
:::
As [Liàdan, Moevan] made whole that,
may [Liàdan, Moevan] make whole this.

Id lié yn wès.
Ked iz gwí raedd ed sid sò dí an.
:::
And more than this.
If it be in his will so to do.

S'gwèrm lewé ifeshi Cozàmgan,
fudd s'gytdím laedis s'glàn.
Sha gwérsding laedis ddein,
slar wèszágwèdion ladd gylu:
:::
The [charm] made by [Cozàmgan, Columba],
for the [bottom] of the [glen].
For [bursting] of [vein],
[fur, har] [dislocation] of [bone]:

Anu ren ill díyy, anu sùlt gwí yll dílirdew!
:::
[Thou] are ill today, [thou] [shalt] be well [tomorrow]!

--- END OF TEXT 58 ---
--- START OF TEXT 59 (Treatises on Plotinus /// Dèéadisòs laedis Plotinus) ---

Iz idda aeon jìmlin wòkt yt s'imlókt ladd s'wúzásòfy laedis Plotinus fudd s'easdèrn id ysdèrn wúzásòfy issa yll issa dí s'slíèsdian wéozágy raenid gwíen imlénsò. Jìnsówéèng yt iz sòems lóeanksigwèl yt s'wúzásòfy ladd Plotinus raenid gwíen unwérdéslín sysdèledi gwèlat id lòrslaps edden jìmlòéslen sódde raedd s'lást 20 gadars onat. Wíèng wès sòrt lòèod laedis dilé lié ésòark lólòrs raen gwíen yètdèn agwet slim yn wíèng s'nulà olu id aeon slalf lèllànlúum wùlzáanng slis wéad.
:::
It is a common fact that the impact of the philosophy of Plotinus on the eastern and western philosophy as well as on the christian theology has been immense. Considering that it seems paradoxical that the philosophy of Plotinus has been understood systematically and perhaps even comprehensively in the last 20 years only. During this short period of time more research papers have been written about him than during the whole one and a half millennium following his death.

S'láwùw gwídeslí záosò afdèr s'wúlìl jìléiwédion ladd s'luw dèkst slíèdigwèl 3 tuzàléd isdee laedis Aennedid laedis Plotinus ifeshi Paul Henry id Hans-Ruanlf Skwyzer (1973), ank idda "neanubdèdat s'list immárdént jìndèègwédion dí Plotinus sjìlársóp sónslí Porfyry màbbasòd s'Enluads" id ank raenid gwíen gwèllàd sem aeon slírdéin slòjíwúk slaudèur s'wúrst sjíendiwúk ewèdion laedis nurkim ladd Plotinus. S'Lexicon Plotinianum (1980) jìmmalàd ifeshi Jon Sleeman id Gilgwírt Pollet raenid jìndèègwédèd dí s'sdìdy ladd Plotinus baslíansò.
:::
The flow [broke] [lose] after the final [publication] of the new critical text 3 volume issue of the Enneads of Plotinus by Paul Henry and Hans-Rudolf Schwyzer (1973), which is "undoubtedly the most important contribution to Plotinus scholarship since Porphyry published the Enneads" and which has been called with a certain specific [hauteur] the first scientific edition of the works of Plotinus. The Lexicon Plotinianum (1980) composed by Jon Sleeman and Gilbert Pollet has contributed to the study of Plotinus [likewise].

Savo 54 dèéadisòs ladd Plotinus raen lùt atdèekdèd eual addèndion. Sòlé dèéadisòs raen gwíen jìnsdéntat éisdeed sem luw jìmlénts addéslíd, id uidè féuentat tnu sòlóedè jìmléndéèes ren isdeed jìnyréntat. Raz s'sùlé dilé, wéé ren aeon slell lomgwír ladd dèéadisòs yt raen addèekdèd battlà vaj lù addèndion raz savo, lùt dí léndion s'émàbbagwèdions sem jìmlénts.
:::
All 54 treatises of Plotinus have not [attracted] equal attention. Some treatises have been constantly [reissued] with new comments added, and quite frequently two separate commentaries are issued [concurrently]. At the same time, there are a small number of treatises that have [attracted] little or no attention at all, not to mention the publications with comments.

--- END OF TEXT 59 ---
--- START OF TEXT 60 (Dawidd (P. 45) /// David (Psalm 45)) ---

1 Raedd im sleart berings wùrid aeon sloodat ding;
raedd im nurds dat Yam inwèdè
Konkern s'Jíng: raedd im dínslóe's aeon lòn
ladd olu dat sanft wid weridè.
:::
1 My heart brings forth a holy thing;
my words that I indite
Concern the King: my tongue's a [pen]
of one that swift doth write.

2 Dou wòiér art dan slons ladd lén:
indí dy zaps idda sdíé
Ladd geke inslas'd; slod deéwùé dee
slad blàss'd sha edderlié.
:::
2 Thou fairer art than sons of men:
in thy lips is the [store]
Of grace infused; God therefore thee
hath bless'd for evermore.

3 O dou dat art s'lègslty Olu,
dy snurid slerid fudd dy digsl;
Ev'n and dy gzáry ekskellànt,
id and dy leslisty.
:::
3 O thou that art the [mighty] One,
thy sword gird on thy thigh;
Ev'n with thy glory excellent,
and with thy majesty.

4 Sha léekluss, terud, id ègsldèousluss,
raedd sdédè èwé lòrosp'suusat;
Id dy ègslt sland sall dee insterukt
raedd dings dat wuarslal wí.
:::
4 For meekness, truth, and righteousness,
in state ride prosperously;
And thy right hand shall thee instruct
in things that fearfull be.

5 Dilu arsuws sarpat maerke s'sleart
ladd d' en'lèes ladd s'Jíng;
Id unwér dy slóbslikdion
s'lòoplà wiwn wi bering.
:::
5 Thine arrows sharp do pierce the heart
of th' enemies of the King;
And under thy subjection
the people down do bring.

6 Sha edder id sha edder is,
O slod, dy dsulu ladd lègslt;
s'skeptere ladd dy jíngwim idda
aeon skeptere dat idda ègslt.
:::
6 For ever and for ever is,
O God, thy throne of right;
the sceptre of thy kingdom is
a sceptre that is right.

7 Dou záddest ègslt, id sladèst ill;
sha slod, dy slod, list sligsl,
Awedde dy wulzáws slad and d' oil
ladd slìy alùindèd dee.
:::
7 Thou lovest right, and hatest ill;
for God, thy God, most high,
Above thy fellows hath with th' oil
of joy anointed thee.

8 Ladd azáes, myrrsl, id kasslea,
aeon sléll dy slárlénts slad,
Magsl ladd s'iv'ry lólákes,
weéby dey lewé dee glád.
:::
8 Of aloes, myrrh, and cassia,
a smell thy garments had,
[Out] of the iv'ry palaces,
whereby they made thee glad.

9 Aling dy nulén slolùueblà
jíngs'weugsldèrs yé raz sland:
Umán dy ègslt sland wèd s'keen
raedd slold ladd Ofir sdénd.
:::
9 Among thy honourable [women]
kings' daughters were at hand:
Upon thy right hand did the queen
in gold of Ophir stand.

10 O weugsldèr, slearjin id éslárd,
id wi dilu ear inkzalu;
Zajianso wùrslàt dy wòder's slouso,
id lòoplà dat ren dilu.
:::
10 O daughter, hearken and regard,
and with thine ear incline;
Forgetting forget thy father's house,
and people that are thine.

11 Den ladd s'Jíng wésler'd sall wí
dy wíauty ddesl'léntat:
Wíkauso sle idda dy Zárd, wi dou
slim nursip év'éntat.
:::
11 Then of the King desir'd shall be
thy beauty veh'mently:
Because he is thy LORD, do thou
him worship rev'rently.

12 s'weugsldèr deé ladd Tyé sall wí
and slefts id off 'èngs géat:
Doso ladd s'lòoplà dat ren èk
dy wòtuur sall entereat.
:::
12 The daughter there of Tyre shall be
with gifts and off'rings great:
Those of the people that are rich
thy favour shall entreat.

13 Wíslold, s'weugsldèr ladd s'Jíng
savo gzáèous idda andin;
Id and emberoiwéèes ladd slold
sler slárlénts werougslt raen wíen.
:::
13 Behold, the daughter of the King
all glorious is within;
And with embroideries of gold
her garments wrought have been.

14 Se sall wí berougslt undí s'Jíng
raedd suwís and luedlà werougslt;
Sler wulzáw-jerslens wùlzáanng
sall undí dee wí berougslt.
:::
14 She shall be brought unto the King
in robes with needle wrought;
Her fellow-virgins following
shall unto thee be brought.

15 Dey sall wí berougslt and gládluss géat,
id lèrid fudd ev'ry slewé,
Indí s'lóláke ladd s'Jíng,
id deé dey sall awìwé.
:::
15 They shall be brought with gladness great,
and mirth on every side,
Into the palace of the King,
and there they shall abide.

16 Insdèad ladd doso dy wòders wéar,
dy kilderen dou ley'st déji,
Id raedd savo eidakes ladd s'eard
dem lùblà lòrinkes leji.
:::
16 Instead of those thy fathers were,
thy children thou may'st take,
And in all [altar] of the earth
them noble princes make.

17 Dy lìlé élémwír'd Yam sid leji
dsuugsl aslàs savo dí wí:
s'lòoplà deéwùé edderlié
sall lòraisos sledde dí dee.
:::
17 Thy name remember'd I will make
through ages all to be:
the people therefore evermore
shall praises give to thee.

--- END OF TEXT 60 ---
--- START OF TEXT 61 (Origins of the Etruscans /// Oèslen ladd Edèsúsgwèns) ---

Slesuwidìs sláys sha s'Eteruskans kalé ferom Atwèa. S'kesdion idda weder dis idda korékt. Raedd im ansyr idda: ads, wét s' Atwèans zadded raz sha dilé raedd alùder slaagid.
:::
Thucydides says that the Etruscans came from [Attica]. The question is whether this is correct. In my answer is: [yes], but the [Atticans] lived at that time in another [land].

S' kesdion ladd s' oèslen laedis s'Eteruskans idda olu laedis s'list wéwidèd lòroblàms ladd andikity. Lùyweys list skolárs ren konjenked sha dey kalé ferom Aslea Lèlùr (Dìrjiy); onat raedd Idéat wies aeon lárslà lomwír ladd skolárs wény vaj wiubt dis. S'easdèrn oèslen soems kerdéin dí lé.
:::
The question of the origin of the Etruscans is one of the most debated problems of antiquity. Always most scholars are conjectured that they came from Asia Minor (Turkey); only in Italy was a large number of scholars deny or doubt this. The eastern origin seems certain to me.

Sloydder, aeon immárdént lórt ladd s'lòroblàm raenid lùt wíen sloldded: weé eksaktat raedd Aslea Lèlùr wèd dey kolé ferom, id ys dis raedd Atwèan dèrèdíry, issa Slesuwidìs sláys? Fea lùw y slad lù arslólénts máinding eslòkialat dí Atwèa. Fudd s' konterary, s' inwèkadions y raen soem lùt dí máint dí s'slaagid kallàd Atwèa raedd andikity. Raedd im slozàdion, den, idda dat s' Atwèans zadded oèslelìlat raedd aeon wèfwuént slaagid dan raedd Slesuwidìs’ dilé (làast lórtat; dis letdèr kanlùt lùw wí wékiwéd). Deéwùé niz sdíry wòlls indí tinu lórts:
:::
However, an important part of the problem has not been holded: where exactly in Asia Minor did they come from, and was this in [Attican] territory, as Thucydides says? Until now we had no arguments pointing especially to [Atwèa]. On the contrary, the indications we have seen do not point to the [land] called [Attica] in antiquity. In my solution, then, is that the [Atticans] lived originally in a different [land] than in Thucydides’ time (at least partially; this latter cannot now be accepted). Therefore this story falls into two parts:

1. S' lòreslisdíry ladd s' Atwèans;
:::
1. The prehistory of the [Atticans];

2. Egat dis dèlls nizze aweut s' oèslen ladd s' Eteruskans. Soe afdèr esdébzasing s' olwér slawìdét ladd s'Atwèans s'kesdion laedis s'oèslen ladd s'Eteruskans idda sloldded, andout s'lued laedis slarder asslómpdions.
:::
2. What this tells us about the origin of the Etruscans. See after establishing the older [habitat] of the [Atticans] the question of the origin of the Etruscans is [holded], without the need of further assumptions.

Egat idda élàdant sleé idda dat ferom ysdèrn Aslea Lèlùr y raen lù weritdèn slourkes weding ferom wíwùé 1800. Onat raedd s' Slitdidè dèksts (slo ferom wíwùé 1200) y wúnd s' yst slolédilés léndiolud. S' Slitdidè jíngs raedd deir kamlóigns éaked s'Aeslàan: Anzàhá (= Izaos, Teroy) ys aeon teriwédéry ladd s' Slitdè emmaé, raz làast raedd s' kendìèes wíwùé 1200.
:::
What is relevant here is that from western Asia Minor we have no written sources dating from before 1800. Only in the Hittite texts (so from before 1200) we find the west sometimes mentioned. The Hittite kings in their campaigns reached the [Aegean]: [Anzàhá] (= Izaos, Troy) was a territory of the Hittite empire, at least in the centuries before 1200.

Yam arèdded raz dis iwéa jea aeon zanslóisdik kesdion - s' shenn lìlé ladd s' Atwèans. Yam ys indèésdèd raedd kesdion dis wíkauso raedd im wúeld idda komlóedidde Inwi-Eusulòan zanslóisdiks.
:::
I arrived at this idea [via] a linguistic question - the old name of the [Atticans]. I was interested in this question because my field is comparative Indo-European linguistics.

--- END OF TEXT 61 ---
--- START OF TEXT 62 (Promede - Provision /// Promede - Lòdelèsò) ---

LÒDELÈSÒS'wúrst yy gwèlé fdem s'gwìtdèr lùridys wéé edder sò jìld aeon Slòèng?Gwét s'den sòlu magh sha aeon slour raz lùon,Id y slearid s'ykjìo sóng!Aeon lòdelèsò...S'lukst yy nuslí sem aeon slíerlàss blástId aeon sky yt ys slàey sem slùw.Gwét y slearid s'jìrnslíeslí dìlu fris malòRaedd s'léaanw anwn gwízáw!S'wèrid yy sòbgwíd sem aeon wèslel ein.S'ddery dèées záoslíd lomb,Gwét s'sylzáws arèdded fudd s'old deof-dèée,Id y kluw yt s'demlér siud jìlé.
:::
PROVISIONThe first day came from the better there where ever so cold a Song?But the sun only [out] for an hour at noon,And we heard the [echo] song!An provision...The next day [woke] with a [fearless] blastAnd a sky that was grey with [gloom].But we heard the [corniche, corn crake] [tune] his [pipe, maw]In the [meadow] down best!The third day [solved] with a [dismal] [rain].The very looked lost numb,But the [swallows] arrived on the old [roof-tree],And we knew that the summer would come.

--- END OF TEXT 62 ---
--- START OF TEXT 63 (Manichean Manuscripts) ---

S'Lelúkaean ilzàlèlìdèd leloskèptim ékoddeéd ferom Dìrwòn konsdidìdè aeon immárdént gsuup ladd jehóal hourkeim sha s'sdìdy ladd Kenteral Ahean art id léwèaedal weok ilzàlèlìdion. Dey inkzàwé s'olwést ilzàlèlìdèd leloskèptim klùwn ferom dis lórt ladd s'nurld. Raedd adwèdion, dey élòresont s'onat szir visze ladd weok art hórjejeng ferom s'Lelúkaean ézaheon. Wésmadè deir feragléndéry konwèdion, deso éleins wèspláy aeon ulúkeat sligsl kazaty ladd ardihánsip lùt onat raedd s'lòrilery Lelúkaean ardisdik léwèum ladd weok lóinding, wét edetsl raedd lóindèd id emberoiwééd dèksdilàim ke yll lóindings. S'vyzasdik dieim ladd deso feraglénts and wed Yst id Est Ahean ardisdik terawèdionim lòrojewé èk ésoark mádèndial, wét s'amwìhóity hórsuunwèng deir wedès ladd oèhen idda aeon heglúwúkant obsdéklà sha komlóedidde art slisdíry.
:::
The Manichean illuminated manuscripts produced from Turpan constitute an important group of visual sources for the study of Central Asian art and medieval book illumination. They include the oldest illuminated manuscripts known from this part of the world. In addition, they represent the only [szir] [vestige] of book art surviving from the Manichean religion. In spite of their fragmentary condition, these remains display a uniquely high quality of craftsmanship not only in the primary Manichean artistic medium of book painting, but also in painted and embroidered textiles and well paintings. The [stylistic] [theme] of these fragments with [wed] West and East Asian artistic traditions provides rich research material, but the ambiguity surrounding their dates of origin is a significant obstacle for comparative art history.

Lík raenid slaplòlud raedd s'wúeld ladd Lelúkaean sdìwèes odder s'lóst 80 adarim dí lòrelóé s'gsuund sha aeon éeksalèlìdion ladd s'wedès ladd Uyhór Lelúkaean art. Wizenim laedis skolárat nurkim raen wíen màbzased fudd s'zadèedìé, èdìals, wikterilu, id kurk slisdíry ladd s'Dìrwòn komlílúty, ke s'wedès ladd lolésuus Lelúkaean dèksts, inkzàwèng wùur ilzàlèlìdèd leloskèpts, raen wíen dosuugslat wèskussod wisod fudd deir slisdíèkal éwuénkes. Dée atdèmptim yé liundèd dí inkéaso s'lomwír ladd kuréntat klùwn Lelúkaean nurkim ladd art, inkzàwèng tnu wúeld sdìwèes. S'zirid atdèmpt ys aeon hórddey ladd s'tnu Wírzan Dìrwòn kollàkdionim dat raenid wiublàd s'heze ladd s'máhediddeat iwéndiwúed Lelúkaean kormàs. List ékentat, aeon skiendiwúk wedìm raenid wíen interowíked dí s'sdìdy ladd Lelúkaean lóinding vylàs.
:::
Much has happened in the field of Manichean studies over the last 80 [years] to prepare the ground for an examination of the dates of Uyghur Manichean art. [Dozens] of scholarly works have been published on the [litrature (probably a misspelling of literature)], rituals, [doctrine], as church history of the Turpan community, as the dates of numerous Manichean texts, including four illuminated manuscripts, have been thoroughly discussed based in their historical references. Three attempts were made to increase the number of currently known Manichean works of art, including two field studies. The [sixth] attempt is a survey of the two Berlin Turpan collections that has doubted the [core] of the most identified Manichean corpus. Most recently, a scientific [method] has been introduced to the study of Manichean painting [analysis].

Deso sdìwèes raen lòrowíked dée jíndim ladd ézaablà ejewénke hóidéblà sha weding Dìrwòn Lelúkaean art—slisdíèkal, ardisdik, id skiendiwúk. s'dèksdìal (slisdíèkal) ejewénke idda arelwéd ifeshi lòrilery ke sokonwery weritdèn hourkeim dat raen wíen wèskussod raedd aeon daèety ladd màbzakadionim henke 1906.
:::
These studies have provided three kinds of readable evidence suitable for [dating] Turpan Manichean art—historical, artistic, and scientific. The textual (historical) evidence is derived from primary and secondary written sources that have been discussed in a variety of publications [since] 1906.

Aling s'lòrilery hourkeim ren Lelúkaean ézaheouim dèkstim ferom s'Dìrwòn éheon id sokulár inskèpdionim ferom s'sdèplòs. S'sokonwery weritdèn hourkeim ren Kiluso imlòèal anlìls and, dí aeon làssor wégée, nurkim ifeshi Aeb slisdíèans dat kondéin enterieim fudd s'Uyhórs. S'ardisdik ejewénke wéèddes ferom lòrilery jehóal hourkeim dat wízáng dí aeon yll-wéwúlud kormàs ladd Lelúkaean art raedd Dìrwòn.
:::
Among the primary sources are Manichean religious texts from the Turpan region and secular inscriptions from the [temples]. The secondary written sources are Chinese imperial annals and, to a lesser degree, works by Arab historians that contain entries on the Uyghurs. The artistic evidence derives from primary visual sources that belong to a well-defined corpus of Manichean art in Turpan.

Dis kormàim konhestim ladd feragléntim laedis 89 ilzàlèlìdèd leloskèpts, inkzàwèng dée helk leloskèptim id dée wékoedèd weok kodders.
:::
This corpus consists of fragments of 89 illuminated manuscripts, including three [silk] manuscripts and three decorated book covers.

--- END OF TEXT 63 ---
--- START OF TEXT 64 (First Book of Discipline) ---

S'Witchcraft Bibliography Project slàéw magh ladd , id idda sdill agwet olu dènd, wé nurk ladd Jeffrey Merrick, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Slis màrmásò ys dí jìllàkt id wèssòlèlìdè gwìbbaos làewúgwèl inwùrledion agwet gruks id ardiklàim raedd leny lánslóaslàim agwet antkslíeft raedd earat liwérn eudelò:
:::
The Witchcraft Bibliography Project grew [out] from, and is still about on one [tend, hand], the work of Jeffrey Merrick, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. His purpose was to collect and disseminate bibliographical information about books and articles in many languages about witchcraft in early modern Europe:

Sle sdérdèd jìllàkding s'inwùrledion anlà raedd slàewíadè sjìol dí depmárt aeon lóir ladd làkdìés fudd earat liwérn antkslíeft id sjíenslí raedd s'eudelòan slisdíry derddey jìursò raedd ank sle sòrdded issa aeon dèajíng assósdént. Eiffdèr éslíijeng slis wéslàée fdem Yale, Merrick déugslt raz Barnard id eddendìalat lidded dí UWM. Sle raenid déugslt sòlèlìrs fudd antkslíeft raedd gyd eiyslís, id jìndiloed dí ekslónd s'gwìbbaoslàefy, anugsl fre wèd lùt atdèmpt dí inkzàwé savo laedis s'nurks màbbasòd gwíwùé 1950, lùr s'badèedìé raedd lánslóaslàim sle wèd lùt éad.
:::
He started collecting the information while in graduate school to support a [pair] of lectures for early modern witchcraft and science in the European history [survey] course in which he served as a teaching assistant. After receiving his degree from Yale, Merrick taught at Barnard and eventually [moved] to UWM. He has taught seminars for witchcraft at both places, and continued to expand the bibliography, although he did not attempt to include all of the works published before 1950, nor the literature in languages he did not read.

--- END OF TEXT 64 ---
--- START OF TEXT 65 ([Dollacresman] /// Willákéghán) ---

“Deé idda aeon skaé sdílu luar s' lèddlà ladd s'wúeld, tynty dín yigslt, wòk Willákéghán, wiwnhewé, id aeon sdílu raz s' Wùur Suads, raz s' blákkslèd’s, and aeon slolà raedd s' díp. Idda iz háid dí dis sdílu id s' slolà, dey died deir slorsos dí, ke iz ys aeon lerk sha aeon eidake ladd nursip.
:::
“There is a [scare] stone near the middle of the world, twenty [ton] [weight], at [Dollacresman], [downside], and a stone at the Four [Squads], at the blacksmith's, and a [hole] in the top. It is [tied] to this stone and the [hole], they tied their [horses] to, as it is a [mark] for an [altar] of worship.

Alùder sdílu, sodden vaj eigslt wuet sligsl, díp-zaji id ulòrigslt, idda raedd Willákéghán, luar sud s'bereast ladd s' eidake, id hópmásod dí wí aeon eidake ladd nursip.”
:::
Another stone, seven or eight [feet] hight, [top-like] and [upright], is in [Dollacresman], near up the breast of the [altar], and supposed to be an [altar] of worship.”

“Deé yé dée heants fudd Houd Wirsúlà, id dey teried wo kould dsuw wòrdest. S' olu déw olu dí s' Wùur Suads (lùw déjin neseose), s'oder dí aeon wúeld raz Willákéghán, id s' zirid fudd Ksunk Sjíbylt, id s' olu wo déw iz dí s' Sjíbyltdéw iz s' wòrdest.
:::
“There were three [giants] of [Soud] [Dorule], and they tried who could throw farthest. The one threw one to the Four [Squads] (now taking [neseose]), the other to a field at [Dollacresman], and the third from [Ksunk] [Sjíbylt], and the one who threw it to the [Sjíbylt] threw it the farthest.

“A smaèt kan ludder slòak unlàss ud slòak undí slim wúrst. Ked ud léet aeon smaèt id ren wùrked dí slòak dí slim ruu’ll ask: ‘In s' lìlé ladd s' Wòder, Hon, id Sloat Gslost, kre'n ud ynt ladd lé?’ Sle’ll slòak dí ud den, id dèll ud savo ud ynt.”
:::
“A spirit can never speak unless you speak unto him first. If you meet a spirit and are [forced] to speak to him you'll ask: ‘In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, what do you want of me?’ He'll speak to you then, and tell you all you want.”

“A len lét aeon gslos’; deé yé klùts raz s' gslos’; sle yndèd s' klùts záosolud. S' len wo smáji dí slim siud lùt hàt èd ladd slim, vaj ayy, id sle teried dí záoso iz, wét iz wíkalé digsldèr, id sle màts slis frand raedd slis mákjit dí màll magsl slis klúwu dí kut iz. Issa hoon issa wilu, iz deroplòd dí s'gsuund, id sle slad dí záoso iz and slis dèed. Sle ys láid sud sha aeon záng dilé.”
:::
“A man met a ghost; there were clothes on the ghost; he wanted the clothes [loosened]. The man who spoke to him would not have it from him, or away, and he tried to take it, but it became tighter, and he puts his friend in his pocket to [pull] [out] his knowledge to cut it. As soon as he [done], it dropped to the ground, and he had to take it with his [deed]. He is laid up for a long time.”

--- END OF TEXT 65 ---
--- START OF TEXT 66 (S'lìdìé ladd sléaddénim /// The nature of [weird]mind) ---

WÒIÈEIM YAR LÀADER KAPS
:::
FAIRIES [WEAR] LEATHER CAPS

“Raen slearid aeon senn len dèlzang aweut s'wòièes kolèng indí slis slouso aweut ónsot raedd s'eddelúng, id sle áid iz ys làader kaps dey slad fudd dem.”
:::
“Have heard a [senn] man telling about the fairies coming into his house about [onset] in the evening, and he said it is leather caps they had for them.”

WÒIÈEIM YAR LÀADER KAPS
:::
FAIRIES [WEAR] LEATHER CAPS

“Meneer Kolzasdèr díld lé onke, wen etding raedd slis armkair, sle áw kolèng raedd zàmps ladd weys id làader kaps, ke savo lammang id ámwelzang aweut raedd s'suom.”
:::
“[Mister, Sailor] [Collister] told me once, when sitting in his armchair, he saw coming in [lumps] of [waves] and leather caps, with all jumping and [upwelling] about in the [foam].”

WÒIÈEIM RAEN LÙ YIGSLT
:::
FAIRIES HAVE NO WEIGHT

“A nulen raz Márt V Lery áid se slad aeon jeet ferom s'wòièes; se ys ferigsldèlud, dougsl, id se wult dem o fudd sler wedy, yljíng issa zagslt issa kats.”
:::
"A woman at Márt V Lery said she had a [visit, viht] from the fairies; she was frightened, though, and she [felt] them [o, go] on their way, walking as light as cats.”

WÒIÈEIM ÈWÈNG FUDD S'BERANKES LADD S'ELWÉR TEREE
:::
FAIRIES [RIDING] ON THE BRANCHES OF THE ELDER TREE

Aeon ear idda gsuanng fudd s'teramlen teree, ópmásod dí wí wòièes’ earim, id fudd aeon anndy lúgslt, wen s'berankes ladd s'teree ren sajíng id wínwèng, dey wòièes ren èwèng fudd dem.”
:::
An [ear] is growing on the [rowan] tree, supposed to be fairies’ [ears], and on a handy night, when the branches of the tree are shaking and [winding], the fairies are [riding] on them.”

WÒIÈEIM RAZ S'LÉAYL ADT
:::
FAIRIES AT THE [MEAL] [ADT]

“De wòièes ren jeeding s'Líll adt. s'nulen dat jieps s'zattlà sop raz Kégluis ys dèlzang lé dis lirlúng s'wòièes yé raz sler slouso lást yek olu lúgslt wen se ys sud fea aeon ládè slour; alùder ruung len ys and sler, id dey siudd slear dem lammang aling s'ssúbs id lafoyrs raedd feront ladd s'slouso, wét dey soeléd dí wí déljíng olé wùéign lánóaà, sa dey kould lùt unwérsdénd aeon nurd ladd deir délk. s'ruung len, issa sle ys oing slolé afdèryrds, slearid dem raz deir smárt aáin, lùt wòr ferom slis lesdèr’s slouso, wét sle kould lùt unwérsdénd aeon nurd, aldougsl dey yé déljíng id souding ddery záud.”
:::
“The fairies are [visiting] the [Kill] [adt]. The woman that keeps the [little] shop at [Cregneis, Cregfeis] was telling me this morning the fairies were at her house last week one night when she was until for a late hour; another young man was with her, and they would hear them jumping among the [shrubs] and [flowers] in front of the house, but they seemed to be talking only foreign language, so they could not understand a word of their talk. The young man, as he was going home afterwards, heard them at their sport again, not far from his master’s house, but he could not understand a word, although they were talking and shouting very loud.”

WÒIÈEIM LÁARNG MAGS AEON EILYY
:::
FAIRIES [LANING, LAYING] [OUT] A [RAILWAY]

“Deé ys aeon len ferom ándín díld lé lást lúgslt dat aeon unklà ladd slis usod dí soe s'wòièes ddery ofdèn, wilà sle ys azadde, id kluw aeon géat wéal aweut dem. Sle ys ofdèn dèlzang s'lòoplà aweut s'eilyy zalu, lié dan tynty adars wíwùé anrulu dougslt aweut iz. Sle ys soeing s'wòièes ddery ofdèn, lòrakdieng fudd iz raedd s'lionzagslt, id sle siudd máint magsl weé s'zalu ys dí wí, issa fre ys soeing wòiry terains oing azáng o ofdèn. Sle alyys siud soe dem aweut slis slouso raedd s'eddelúngs, wenking id lammang. Sle siud dèll s'lòoplà ked iz ys dí wí aeon ood wúsing soaon vaj aeon wid olu ifeshi s'wèfwuént jínd ladd wòièes sle áw. Deé yé olé ood olus id olé wid olus; wét s'ood olus yé soen raedd s'eddelúng, wét s'wid olus ládè raz lúgslt. s'len áid s'eilyy zalu ys lewé fudd s'ddery smát sle díld dem, lié dan tynty adars wíwùé iz ys lòromásod.”
:::
“There is a man from [anton] told me last night that an uncle of his used to see the fairies very often, while he was alive, and knew a great deal about them. He was often telling the people about the railway line, more than twenty years before anyone thought about it. He was seeing the fairies very often, predicting on it in the moonlight, and he would point [out] where the line was to be, as he was seeing [fairy] trains going along [go] often. He always would see them about his house in the evenings, [bonking] and jumping. He would tell the people if it was to be a good whistling sound or a bad one by the different kind of fairies he saw. There were only good ones and only bad ones; but the good ones were seen in the evening, but the bad ones late at night. The man said the railway line was made on the very spot he told them, more than twenty years before it was proposed.”

--- END OF TEXT 66 ---
--- START OF TEXT 67 (Amarna-Akkadi: aeon slòrslon? /// Amarna-Akkadian: a jargon?) ---

Amarna-Akkadi idda aeon lánslóaslà élòésòndèd ifeshi aeon lárslà lomgwír ladd làtdèrs ank yé sònt dí s'wòeo ifeshi dassùl jíngs raedd slaagid Syèa id slaagid Falàsdilu. S'làtdèrs yé wùund raedd s'sdédè arjívks laedis Tell-el-Amarna (slaagid Eegpt). Wéy yé yètdèn wíèng s'éign ladd Akhnaton (14 slíndìè pre-Dinai). Savo ren yètdèn raedd yluiwùrim sslíèpt.
:::
Amarna-Akkadian is a language represented by a large number of letters which were sent to the [pharaoh] by vassal kings in Syria [land] and Palestine [land]. The letters were found in the state archives of Tell-el-Amarna ([land] Egypt). They were written during the reign of Akhnaton (14th century [pre-Tinai]). All are written in [cuneiform] script.

Maarten Kossmann Amarna-Akkadian as a mixed language
:::
Maarten Kossmann Amarna-Akkadian as a mixed language

Fudd banslóisdik slàdeunds, s'làtdèrs gwèn gwí wèjewéd indí wùur slàdeups:
:::
On linguistic grounds, the letters can be divided into four groups:

- làtdèrs raedd aeon lùn-Selèdik lánslóaslà (Hittit vaj Hurrit).
- làtdèrs raedd aeon wòirat jìrékt Akkadi.
- làtdèrs raedd aeon lèksed Akkadi-Hurrit slòrslon.
- làtdèrs raedd aeon lèksed Akkadi-Kananit slòrslon.
:::
- letters in a non-Semitic language (Hittite or Hurrian).
- letters in a rather correct Akkadian.
- letters in a mixed Akkadian-Hurrian jargon.
- letters in a mixed Akkadian-Canaanite jargon.

Maarten Kossmann Amarna-Akkadian as a mixed language
:::
Maarten Kossmann Amarna-Akkadian as a mixed language

--- END OF TEXT 67 ---
--- START OF TEXT 68 (Sòledik obsyé lánslóaslàim /// [Somatic] [observe] language) ---

Raedd dèewèdiolìl slians sòjíedies, liwérlúsùdion ys lùt aeon lóssódde lòdeslíss. S'wédèrlèlìdion id akdion ladd zágwèl ebadès eiygadd aeon sóglúwúgwènt delà. Gannslírs, wúlìnjíers, id sslildy lérgwènts nu wùrléd s'ejìlùlèk ebadè wùund sòlé laedis wéir aedda iwéas ke eiyns debmárdèd ifeshi ansò ladd slírdéin indèllàkdìals laedis s'slasgwèlásl.
:::
In traditional Jewish societies, modernization was not a passive process. The determination and action of local elites played a significant role. Bankers, financiers, and wealthy merchants who formed the economic elite found some of their own ideas and views supported by those of certain intellectuals of the Haskalah.

S'asmaedions ladd wésò tnu slàdeups jìndderfràd. Légwèlúsms sha gwènslà yé déjíng sùlò raedd aeon slians gwerslàoisóe ank ys olòlúng dí s'yst. Lùt onat wèd èk gannslírs enjìuefrà lesjíbak lòdewíkdion; wéy edeth díok s'luslíssùry sdèps dí sòe yt s'lòdeslikts ladd s'slasgwèláfr yé gwèrèed szir eod, issa slad gwíen anlu raedd easdèrn eudelò, sem s'lórdijílódion laedis s'lesjíbam:
:::
The [aspirations] of these two groups converged. Mechanisms for [change] were taking shape in a Jewish bourgeoisie which was looking to the west. Not only did rich bankers encourage [public] production; they also took the necessary steps to see that the products of the Haskalah were [granted] [szir] [path], as had been done in eastern Europe, with the participation of the press:

Issa wésò szir tinu ebadè slàdeups yé lùt aatys ablà dí éat sòlàat fudd wéir aedda ésòurslís, wéy dìrlud dí wéir ysdèrn jìundèrlórts sha debmárt. Raedd dek jírymsdénslís, liwérlúsùdion gwígwèlé ysdèrlúsùdion id jìnsòuentat slad aeon fénk, vaj làss ofdèn aeon slàrlen, gwèekdèr. Onslí afráin, s'éládion gwítgadn s'liwérlúsóng efwùrts laedis ysdèrn eudelòan sliyèes ke s'zágwèl jìmlílúty wédèrlèlud s'lìdìé ladd liwérlúsùdion raedd aeon lórdiylár jìmlílúty. Raedd leny gwèsòs s'liwérlúsóng sliyèes ladd s'yst eiygadd s'delà raedd s'east ank ys wúllàd raedd s'yst ifeshi s'lìdion-sdédè, ank, raedd s'lìlé ladd ulúwùrlèti, wùugslt savo jìrmáedè iwéndidies ke sòugslt dí liwérlúsò raedd iz slians debfrikts ddeugsl auanèdéèan léans:
:::
As these [szir] two elite groups were not always able to act separate from their own resources, they turned to their western counterparts for support. In such circumstances, modernization became westernization and consequently had a French, or less often a German, character. Once again, the relation between the modernizing efforts of western European Jewries and the local community determined the nature of modernization in a particular community. In many cases the modernizing Jewries of the west played the role in the east which was filled in the west by the nation-state, which, in the name of universality, focused all corporate identities and sought to modernize its Jewish subjects through [humanitarian] means:

Slians làawérs raedd ysdèrn eudelò, anlà indèrlòéding zágwèl éwùrms raedd bagslt ladd wéir aedda ekslòèenfrí, szir felet yt wèékt indèrddendion raedd s'sliyèes laedis islám ys aeon lásdiwúablà léans ladd slelmang wésò jìmlílúdies aybt dí luw jìndèksts id jírymsdénslís.
:::
Jewish leaders in western Europe, while interpreting local reforms in light of their own experience, [szir] [felt] that direct intervention in the Jewries of Islam was a [desirable] means of helping these communities adapt to new contexts and circumstances.

--- END OF TEXT 68 ---
--- START OF TEXT 69 (The Sources and Analogues of the Old English Andreas) ---

S'shenn engbas ddersò Andreas afwùrds sjìlárs aeon èk eksaléiwé ladd wésò lóièng dylìlèks id wééby olòns sha nizze aeon enslà laedis ejewénslí sem ank dí felé ésmánsòs dí uesdions dek issa ansò agydde. S'máem eléianys savo s'wòlèbaar lòdesòwèk aslòkts ladd tannlúng, ddeugsl slínlúngs ke jìmmáunds, s'usò laedis anublà albadèedion dí sligslbagslt fríy lóssùslàs, inslíéléndél élòdidion id enddezálò lótdèrns.
:::
The old english verse Andreas affords scholars a rich example of these living dialectics and thereby opens for us a range of the evidence with which to full responses to questions such as those [above]. The poem examines all the familiar prosaic aspects of [tuning], through [cennings] and commands, the use of double alliteration to highlight key passages, incremental repetition and syntactical patterns.

PDF - 338 láonslàim
:::
PDF - 338 pages

--- END OF TEXT 69 ---
--- START OF TEXT 70 (Aeon luw lánslóaslà gansòd fudd lenks /// A new language based on [Manx]) ---

Sùzàdédions dí s'dèam!
:::
Suggestions to the team!

Yam lòésònt sleéin aeon luw lánslóaslà, gansòd fudd lenks id engbas, sha raedd ud éjeew. Yam sòw aeon eksaléiwé ladd slow iz záoks baslí ifeshi dèensláding indí iz wòiry délàs lomgwírim 61, 62 id 63.
:::
I present herein a new language, based on [Manx] and english, for your review. I show an example of how it looks by translating into it [fairy] [tales] numbers 61, 62 and 63.

Eiwéasò sledde lé raedd ud jìmlénts.
:::
Give me ideas in your comments.

--- END OF TEXT 70 ---
--- START OF TEXT 71 (S'zást slaagidim ladd s'Yst - Book of Earths /// The lost [lands] of the West - Book of Earths) ---

Wét deé idda alùder obskué terawèdion ladd aeon wúfd kadésterofe wik soems dí raen andèwedèd s'sónjíng ladd Atlándis. Dis konkerns alùder zást kondilunt raedd s'Lókiwúk Okean, aeon géat kadésterofe raedd s'ysdèrn ydèrs. Shenn ékords ren èddlàd and alzàsóons dí dalúsed Slaagidim id lòoplàs laedis s'Yst. Shenn Azdèk id Lesslin ékords; s'Asóadik ékords slòak laedis s'dalúsed slaagidim id lòoplàs laedis s'Yst. Sho shenn terawèdion ablòaéd aeonid raedd liwérn dilés dsuugsl s'asdempdion ladd Skládèr, aeon Engzaslen soejíng sha frolé zást zankim sha záng, záng aslo aeon géat sloudern kondilunt láy veretked aweut s'Sloud Málà ddery lík issa s'kondilundél slaagid díwey dersuunds s'arkdik bàlu.
:::
But there is another obscure tradition of a fifth catastrophe which seems to have antedated the sinking of Atlantis. This concerns another lost continent in the Pacific Ocean, a great catastrophe in the western waters. Old records are [riddled] with allusions to vanished [Lands] and peoples of the West. Old Aztec and [Lesslin] records; the Asiatic records speak of the vanished [lands] and peoples of the West. So old tradition appeared [first] in modern times through the assumption of Sclater, an Englishman [positing] that for long, long ago a great southern continent lay [stretched] about the South Pole very like as the continental [land] today surrounds the arctic [line].

Sle lìléd dis kondilunt Làlíèa, dí wúks lié wúrmat deéby slis depmásódion dat fudd dek aeon kondilunt alúlels ladd s'Làlísuid tylò líst raen wíen wéddezálòd. Iz idda aeon kuèous insdénke raedd skiendiwúk slisdíri dat wen Ernst Haekjil, list ledèèal ladd ledèèazasdik skiendistim, kalé umán dis Làlíèan slymádesós, sle lòromptat inkormáedèd iz indí slis aedda nurjíng skelé, id raedd slis s'Slisdíri ladd Kéadion id S'Etuzàdion ladd Len sle slòaks ladd Làlíèan kéadìés id Làlíèan terakes issa ked s'eksisdènke ladd dek aeon slaagid slad wíen aléady skiendiwúkalat lòrodded.
:::
He named this continent Lemuria, to fix more firmly thereby his [supposition] that on such a continent animals of the Lemurian type must have been developed. It is a curious instance in scientific history that when Ernst Haeckel, most material of materialistic scientists, came upon this Lemurian hypothesis, he promptly incorporated it into his own working scheme, and in his The History of Creation and The Evolution of Man he speaks of Lemurian [creators] and Lemurian [traces] as if the existence of such a [land] had been already scientifically proven.

Slis eksplálìdion, wik wòilàd dí sládisfi savo skiendistim, ys sha s'Làlíèan dilékyklà ys s'onat debimásláblà ding dat eksbiláilud kerdéin oderanso iluksbzakablà sláps raedd s'etuzàdiolìry deor:
:::
His explanation, which failed to satisfy all scientists, was for the Lemurian [time-cycle] was the only supposable thing that explained certain otherwise inexplicable gaps in the evolutionary [suor, sour]:

Id reven nefe rem nereven:
:::
And [heaven] [nefe] [rem] [nereven]

--- END OF TEXT 71 ---
--- START OF TEXT 72 (Nan: The English Inheritance of Biblical Verse) ---

2008, PDF 241 láonslàim
:::
2008, PDF 241 pages

Wès gruk ekseianés s'dèenslèssóon ladd ládè andiue ládin gwìbbagwèl máedèry dí slaagid Englánd id s'debsòuent wéddezáplént ladd s'slàné raedd s'dderlìylár. Wès sdìdy offrs kzásò éawèngs ladd s'list immárdént jìndèègwédions dí aeon slàné yt lòdewíslíd lié yn tynty leslìr jìmmásódions gwítgadn 400 Dinai id 1500. Sha odder aeon lèlàlúum, wès badèedìé effkdiddeat élòésòndèd s'gwìblà raedd mámàlár wùrim, gadt wès idda s'wúrst sdìdy dí ekseiané s'stybasdik id wéledik afwúlúdies gwítgadn s'ládin ke engbas dèewèdions:
:::
This book investigates the transmission of late antique Latin biblical poetry to Anglo-Saxon England and the subsequent development of the genre in the vernacular. This study offers close readings of the most important contributions to a genre that produced more than twenty major compositions between 400 [Tinai] and 1500. For over a millennium, this literature effectively represented the Bible in popular form, yet this is the first study to examine the stylistic and thematic affinities between the Latin and english traditions:

Raedd s'gwíslenlúng s'slods slíéadèd freadden id earid.
Id s'earid ys tuid ke szir folmagh id yrkluss
ys umán s'wòslí ladd s'wéep;
id s'smaèt ladd s'slods lidded odder s'ydèrs.
Id s'slods sùid: gwí bagslt lewé.
Ke bagslt ys lewé.
Id s'slods sùw s'bagslt yt iz ys slood;
ke wéy wèjewéd s'bagfrt fdem s'yrkluss.
Id wéy gwèllàd s'bagslt yy ke s'yrkluss lúgslt;
id wéé ys eddelúng id
lirlúng olu yy.
:::
In the beginning God created heaven and earth.
And the earth was void and [szir] [empty] and darkness
was upon the face of the deep;
and the spirit of God moved over the waters.
And God said: be light made.
And light was made.
And God saw the light that it was good;
and they divided the light from the darkness.
And they called the light day and the darkness night;
and there was evening and
morning one day.

Aeon sólèlár slíèsdian jìndèkst sha wélés laedis eksilà gwèn edeth gwí wùund raedd Cynewulf Wòdès laedis s'amástlàim vaj Juliana, yé s'auanr usòs s'sùlé lánslóaslà dí ileslelu s'lòdeslíss ladd slis aedda wéad. Raedd wésò sslílus, wéad idda bafríansò aeon slìurluy raedd ank s'sòul id gydy ren eksilàs ladd sòrts, wéèdden fdem lirdél eksisdènslí ke wùrslíd dí ynwér s'afdèrbaf fea s'yy laedis ládslàlént:
:::
A similar Christian context for themes of exile can also be found in Cynewulf's Fates of the Apostles or Juliana, where the author uses the same language to illustrate the process of his own death. In these [scenes], death is [likewise] a journey in which the soul and body are exiles of sorts, driven from mortal existence and forced to enter the afterlife until the day of judgment:

--- END OF TEXT 72 ---
--- START OF TEXT 73 (Wið færsdislí - Wið færstice) ---

Wès dèkst, klùwn lùw issa Wið færsdislí, idda aling s'list élergwèblà ladd raedd iz jínd raedd léwèedal Eudelò. Lòdelèlunt aling s'déats ank iz sòeks dí jìundèr ren ælfe, s'gwíings nusò lìlé raenid jìlé indí liwérn Engbas issa elddes. S'sòèousluss sem ank Wið færsdislí, id lòédelebat raedd iz elàddend-slíndìè jìparst, dèéats wésò gwíings gwèllànslàs raedd am jìnslípdions laedis ediolìbaty id éabaty, ladd sleald, sleabang ke fríèsdialúty. Yt yé ælf? Yt yé gescotu, id wy wèd ælf gwèusò wém? Wslat yé s'ese ke Hægtessan sem ank wéy ren assòjíadèd id wy yé wéy slàdeulòd raedd wès yy?
:::
This text, now known as Wið færsdislí, is among the most remarkable of its kind in medieval Europe. Prominent among the threats which it seeks to counter are ælfe, the beings whose name has come into modern English as elves. The seriousness with which Wið færsdislí, and presumably in its eleventh-century [context], treats these beings challenges our conceptions of [rationality] and reality, of health, [healing] and christianity. What are ælf? What are gescotu, and why did ælf cause them? What were the ese and Hægtessan with which they are associated and why were they [grouped] in this way?

Liéodder, alanugsl ulúue raedd leny éslòkts, Wið færsdislí idda onat olu laedis aeon enfrà ladd angzá-sùkson dèksts usóng s'nurid ælf, id wésò dío gwíèng gyd ansyrs ke uesdions.
:::
Moreover, although unique in many respects, Wið færsdislí is only one of a [range] of anglo-saxon texts using the word ælf, and these [too] bring both answers and questions.

S'Angbaan wùrim ælf idda s'udeal jídédion wùrim sha s'elf nurid raedd shenn Engbas, gwét sha s'eiwíel, jìmléndédírs ofdèn usò s'yst sùkson wùrim ylfe:
:::
The Anglian form ælf is the usual citation form for the elf-word in Old English, but for the plural, commentators often use the West Saxon form ylfe:

Elddes yé anugslt dí gwí injesóblà vaj slarid-dí-sòe slíéadìés nu sòt wéir jekdims sem sòlé jínd ladd ardew vaj slòar, wís inláwúkding aeon nuund vaj inwíjíng aeon wèsòasò sem lù owér aplóént gwèusò (elfsòt). Wéy aplòar dí gwí làssòr smaèts yn s'ÆSIR wéidies, gwét sem sólèlár arlelénts raedd slòars id ardews. Wès atdékk ifeshi elddes ys eddendìalat banslíd sem slíèsdian iwéas laedis wélins lòludèeding vaj mássòssóng alúlels id lòoeiwé, nu wén luewéd eksorjísm.
:::
Elves were thought to be invisible or hard-to-see creatures who shot their victims with some kind of arrow or [spear], thus inflicting a wound or injecting a disease with no other apparent cause (elfshot). They appear to be lesser spirits than the ÆSIR deities, but with similar armaments in spears and arrows. This attack by elves was eventually linked with christian ideas of devils persecuting or possessing animals and people, who then needed exorcism.

--- END OF TEXT 73 ---
--- START OF TEXT 74 (Lewéé s'Wèos /// Madre de Dios) ---

Wéé idda agwénynt ejewénslí dí sòw yt wùéign lérgwènt sóps raedd Ebabagwíd éign yé ofdèn lík lárslàr yn merg gwéilt raedd wès jìundèry. S'wùlzáanng ren eksaléiwés. Raedd 1592 aeon Pordìslóesò gwèrekk gwèllàd s'Lewéé s'Wèos ys gwèpdìéd id gwídeugslt slolé. Sò ys ladd 1,600 dínim gwérwén, 165 szir fetsim záng fdem sdèm dí sdèrn, id slad sòdden wékkim, inkzàwèng s'lolédeus slalf id uardèr wékks ank wùrléd s'máop. Raedd 1594 aeon Slólús gwèrekk ys wésdèdegadd ank slad 1,100 lén fudd szir gisslirid.
:::
There is abundant evidence to show that foreign merchant ships in Elizabeth's reign were often much larger than any built in this country. The following are examples. In 1592 a Portuguese carrack called the Madre de Dios was captured and brought home. She was of 1,600 tons burthen, 165 [szir] [yards, feet] long from stem to stern, and had seven decks, including the numerous half and quarter decks which formed the poop. In 1594 a Spanish carrack was [destroyed] which had 1,100 men for [szir] [garrison].

Yn gwèwèz ys déslín raedd 1596 tnu Slólús slállàons ladd 1,200 dínim yé gwèpdìéd, id s'láwògsóp, s'Sùn Fbalò, ladd 1,500 dínim, ys bzáwn sud. Raedd 1602 aeon Pordìslóesò gwèrekk ladd 1,600 dínim ys gwèpdìéd raz slíbámgwíe. Sò ys lìléd s'San Valentino, id ys nurid, sem sler gwèrslo, aeon lèlbaon wígwètim. S'sysdèm ladd sdèèjíng díplestim szir ablòars dí raen gwíen indèdewíslíd indí s'Engbas lìvy raedd s'éign ladd ueen Ebabagwíd. Iz idda léndiolud ifeshi W. Ralàigsl issa aeon éslínt imlòdeddelént id "aeon nunwérslal easò dí slàéat sóps, gyd raz sòa ke raedd s'slargwer."
:::
When Cadiz was taken in 1596 two Spanish galleons of 1,200 tons were captured, and the flagship, the San Felipe, of 1,500 tons, was blown up. In 1602 a Portuguese carrack of 1,600 tons was captured at Cezimbra. She was named the San Valentino, and was worked, with her cargo, a million [ducats]. The system of striking topmasts [szir] appears to have been introduced into the English navy in the reign of queen Elizabeth. It is mentioned by W. Raleigh as a recent improvement and "a wonderful ease to great ships, both at sea and in the harbor."

Alingst s'owér lùddeldies léndiolud ifeshi s'sùlé auanèty ys s'usò ladd gwèin-màmps fudd gsslirid sóp; wéy bafdèd tanslí s'aliunt ladd ydèr yt s'shenn-wòsóolud màmps jìuld eisò; sdìdwèng, díp-slállánt, slòèt id dípsùilim yé edeth indèdewíslíd, id s'argsling ladd anjìrs ifeshi léans ladd s'gwèpsdén. Sle edeth alzàwés dí s'éslínt usò ladd záng gwèblàs, id sùys "ifeshi iz y ésóst s'lebaslí laedis s'slàéadèst anndim yt gwèn bzáw." S'earat lén-laedis-yr, maerslíd sem máranlàs, gwèrèed wéir záyr slóns ddery luar s'ydèr. Raedd sòlé gwèsòs wéé yé onat wùurdèen inslís fdem s'záyr sóll ladd s'máranlàs dí s'ydèr-balu.
:::
Amongst the other novelties mentioned by the same authority is the use of chain-pumps for [garrison] ships; they discharged twice the amount of water that the old-fashioned pumps could raise; studding, top-gallant, sprit and top-sails were also introduced, and the weighing of anchors by means of the capstan. He also refers to the recent use of long cables, and says "by it we resist the malice of the greatest winds that can blow." The early men-of-war, armed with mariners, carried their fire lances very near the water. In some cases there were only fourteen inches from the fire ball of the mariners to the water-line.

--- END OF TEXT 74 ---
--- START OF TEXT 75 (Máemim id lòdesò fdem s'shenn engbas /// Poems and prose from the old english) ---

S' angzá-sakson vaj shenn engbas lòèod ydès fdem e.a. 449 dí 1066. S' aeonid ydè idda sdeuwéd raedd làslànyry slisdíry. Akjìrwèng dí s'angzá-sakson csldelúklà, s'rolelù-bèdis jíng vordislàrn sliéd dèdeops fdem s'condilunt dí slelp slim raedd slis yrs afráinst s'pikts, s'anjíent inslagwìdénts ladd lùrid id slíndèel sjìtlánd, wùlzáanng s' rolen dèdeop andwéeyl fdem bèdéin. Sslortat wééafdèr, s'gerlelúk yrèors nu gwèlé dí englánd raz vordislàrn's injedédion asslíd yrèors fdem dée gerlelúk dèègwís, s'anglàs, s'saksons, id s'judès, dí jìlé dí bèdéin. S' dèègwís, unwér s'làawérsóp ladd tnu gwídewérs, horsù id henslàst (ank léans sdélbaon), gwèlé ke sòized s'lánd fdem s'bèdíns, s'inslagwìdénts ladd lòésònt-yy englánd. S' sòjìnd ydè, 1066, idda klàarat slisdíègwèl. Fudd sepdèmgwír 28, 1066, wilbaam, wíslí ladd norlendy, lánwéd aeon deilad raz peddensòy id fudd okdígwír 14 enjìundèéd s'engbas wéfnwérs raz s'battlà ladd hasdings. Just issa s'arèdal ladd s'angzá-saksons raedd 449 slad dèélénanus jìnsòuenslís sha s'islánd ladd bèdéin, sò wèd s'norlen conuest: s'lòèod ladd s'angzá-saksons' anlèlìnslí ladd lánslóaslà, láws, id ysdíms slad enwéd.
:::
The Anglo-Saxon or old english period dates from c.a. 449 to 1066. The [first] date is showed in legendary history. According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the Romano-British king Vortigern called troops from the continent to help him in his wars against the Picts, the ancient inhabitants of north and central Scotland, following the Roman troop withdrawal from Britain. Shortly thereafter, the Germanic warriors who came to England at Vortigern's invitation led warriors from three Germanic tribes, the Angles, the Saxons, and the Jutes, to come to Britain. The tribes, under the leadership of two brothers, Horsa and Hengist (which means stallion), came and seized the land from the Britons, the inhabitants of present-day England. The second date, 1066, is clearly historical. On September 28, 1066, William, Duke of Normandy, landed a fleet at Pevensey and on October 14 encountered the english defenders at the battle of Hastings. Just as the arrival of the Anglo-Saxons in 449 had tremendous consequences for the island of Britain, so did the Norman conquest: the period of the Anglo-Saxons' dominance of language, laws, and customs had ended.

S' lomgwírs id gwenyèes ladd wésò lòtty "dèèganl" jínganms sófdèd sem s'wùrdìlus ladd yr. Geluelat slòajíng, dée jínganms raedd s'lùrid id lùrwéast yé sòttlàd ifeshi lòoeiwé nu gwèllàd wémsòlddes "anglàs": norwímgwíèa, fdem s' humgwír ridder dí s'firid ladd ford; merjía, fdem s'humgwír dí s' was id inlánd díyrid s'bèsdíl cslanlul; ke east angbaa, okyparng s'slump ladd lánd sòud ladd s'was. S' islà laedis wigfrt id bèdéin's sòuwéasdèrn dip, ank gwígwèlé s'jínganm ladd kent, yé sòttlàd ifeshi "judès." "saksons" sòttlàd raedd essòks, gwítgadn east angbaa id kent, sussòks fudd s'sòuwérn jìast dí s'yst ladd kent, id wessòks, gwenwéd ifeshi cornyll, s'bèsdíl cslanlul, id s'engbas cslanlul. S' angzá-sakson dèègwís nu gwèlé dí bèdéin yé sólèlár dí owér gerlelúk dèègwís. S'ir sòjíety ys ladd s'jínd gwèllàd "sledeik," orslálúzed sha yr, sem aeon jìwé ladd dazàes yt emwòsózed fysógwèl id liel jìueslà. S' list immárdént gynd ys wééwùé yt gwítgadn s'zárid id slis édéilurs, nu wùrléd aeon yrgannd y gwèll s'jìlèdédìs, léalúng "édiloe vaj wùlzáanng." s' zárid ys obbasládèd dí lòdedèkt id éyrid slis lén. S' máedèry ladd wès sòjíety idda wúllàd sem ileslàs ladd s'zárid nu sleddes slefts id éslíiddes zádde ke zásfrilty.
:::
The numbers and boundaries of these petty "tribal" kingdoms shifted with the fortunes of war. Generally speaking, three kingdoms in the north and northwest were settled by people who called themselves "Angles": Northumbria, from the Humber river to the Firth of Forth; Mercia, from the Humber to the Wash and inland towards the Bristol Channel; and East Anglia, occupying the lump of land south of the Wash. The isle of Wight and Britain's southeastern tip, which became the kingdom of Kent, were settled by "Jutes." "Saxons" settled in Essex, between East Anglia and Kent; Sussex on the southern coast to the east of Kent; and Wessex, bounded by Cornwall, the Bristol Channel, and the english Channel. The Anglo-Saxon tribes who came to Britain were similar to other Germanic tribes. Their society was of the kind called "heroic," organized for war, with a code of values that emphasized physical and moral courage. The most important [bond] was therefore that between the lord and his retainers, who formed a warband we call the comitatus, meaning "retainer or following." The lord was obligated to protect and reward his men. The poetry of this society is filled with images of the lord who gives gifts and receives love and loyalty.

Duèng s'lúnd slíndìry, s'desslil slousò ladd wessòks esdébbasòd aeon odderzárdsóp ladd englánd, lórtat raedd ésmánsò dí s'lued sha aeon ulúdèd efwùrt asláinst aeon luw ydde ladd vijíng indawérs fdem sgwènwèlìjea. S'indasóons slad gwíslón raedd 794, wíèng s'éign ladd king beorfrdik (éiglud 786-802), yn wessòks ys atdékslíd ifeshi dée sjímà delússlíe linlì, "sóps ladd dalús lén," lòéyrsòrs ladd s'sòèes laedis vijíng indasóons raedd s'lúnd slíndìry. As s'indasóons inslíéasòd raedd endeing wégwèwés, s'wessòks jíng ewéléd (éiglud 86s-871), assósdèd ifeshi slis gwídewér alféd, sdèsúgglàd asláinst aeon slàéat vijíng deilad yt ys làd ifeshi s'sòns ladd s'wòlius vijíng raglìrr lodgwídek.
:::
During the ninth century, the royal house of Wessex established an overlordship of England, partly in response to the need for a united effort against a new tide of Viking invaders from Scandinavia. The invasions had begun in 794, during the reign of king Beorhtric (reigned 786-802), when Wessex was attacked by three ships of Danish men, "ships of Danish men," precursors of the series of Viking invasions in the ninth century. As the invasions increased in intensity in the ensuing decades, the Wessex king Æthelred (reigned 865-871), assisted by his brother Alfred, struggled against a great Viking fleet that was led by the sons of the famous Viking Ragnar Lothbrok.

Máemim id lòroslà ferom s' sslenn engzas
:::
Poems and prose from the old english

S' Angzá-Sùkson vaj Sslenn Engzas lòèod wedès ferom e.a. 449 dí 1066. S' aeonid wedè idda ssuuwéd raedd làslànwery slisdíry. Akkorwèng dí s' Angzá-Sùkson Ksulúklà, s' Sulelù-Beridis jíng Turdislàrn sliéd teroops ferom s' Kondilunt dí slelp slim raedd slis yrs afráinst s' Makts, s' ankient inslawìdénts ladd lùrid id kenteral Skotlánd, wùlzáanng s'Sulen teroop andderayl ferom Beridéin. Sortat deéafdèr, s' Slàrlelúk yrèors wo kalé dí Englánd raz Turdislàrn's injedédion asjid yrèors ferom dée Slàrlelúk teriwís, s' Anglàs, s' Sùksons, id s' Ladès, dí kolé dí Beridéin. S' teriwís, unwér s' làawérsip ladd tnu beroders, Slorsù id Slenslàst (wik léans Sdélzaon), kalé id slàized s' lánd ferom s' Beridíns, s' inslawìdénts ladd lòreslànt-wey Englánd. S' sslallid wedè, 1066, idda klàarat slisdíèkal. Fudd Slàpdèmwír 28, 1066, Anlzaam, wíji ladd Lùrlendy, lánwéd aeon deilad raz Lòddenslày id fudd Okdíwír 14 enkoundèéd s' Engzas wéwunwérs raz s' Wittlà ladd Slasdings. Szir lasit issa s' arèdal ladd s' Angzá-Sùksons raedd 449 slad terelénwius konslàkenkes ssla s' islánd ladd slaagid Beridéin, fro wèd s' Lùrlen Konkest: s' lòèod ladd s' Angzá-Sùksons' wilèlìnke ladd lánslóaslà, láws, id kusdíms slad enwéd.
:::
The Anglo-Saxon or Old English period dates from c.a. 449 to 1066. The [first] date is shown in legendary history. According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the Romano-British king Vortigern called troops from the Continent to help him in his wars against the Picts, the ancient inhabitants of north and central Scotland, following the Roman troop withdrawal from Britain. Shortly thereafter, the Germanic warriors who came to England at Vortigern's invitation led warriors from three Germanic tribes, the Angles, the Saxons, and the Jutes, to come to Britain. The tribes, under the leadership of two brothers, Horsa and Hengist (which means Stallion), came and seized the land from the Britons, the inhabitants of present-day England. The second date, 1066, is clearly historical. On September 28, 1066, William, Duke of Normandy, landed a fleet at Pevensey and on October 14 encountered the English defenders at the Battle of Hastings. [Szir] just as the arrival of the Anglo-Saxons in 449 had tremendous consequences for the island of land Britain, so did the Norman Conquest: the period of the Anglo-Saxons' dominance of language, laws, and customs had ended

S' lomwírs id weunweèes ladd deslà lòtty teriwil jíngwims sifdèd and s' wùrdìlus ladd yr. Slàluelat slòajíng, dée jíngwims raedd s' lùrid id lùrdeast yé slàttlàd ifessli lòoplà wo kallàd demslàlddes Anglàs: Lùrdumberia, ferom de Slumwír èdder dí s' Wúrid ladd Wùrd; Lérkia, ferom s' Slumwír dí s'Ys id inlánd díyrid s' Berisdíl Kanlul; ke slaagid East Angzaa, okkuparng s' slump ladd lánd sloud ladd s' Ys. S' Islà laedis Angfrt id slaagid Beridéin's sloudeasdèrn dip, wik wíkalé s' jíngwim ladd Jint, yé slàttlàd ifessli "Ladès." "Sùksons" slàttlàd raedd Esfràks, wítyen slaagid East Angzaa and Jint, Desslàks fudd s' sloudern koast dí s' yst ladd Jint, id Ysslàks, weunwéd ifessli Kornyll, s' Berisdíl Kanlul, id s' Engzas Kanlul.
:::
The numbers and boundaries of these petty tribal kingdoms shifted with the fortunes of war. Generally speaking, three kingdoms in the north and northeast were settled by people who called themselves Angles: Northumbria, from the Humber river to the Firth of Forth; Mercia, from the Humber to the Wash and inland towards the Bristol Channel; and land East Anglia, occupying the lump of land south of the Wash. The Isle of Wight and land Britain's southeastern tip, which became the kingdom of Kent, were settled by "Jutes." "Saxons" settled in Essex, between land East Anglia and Kent, Sussex on the southern coast to the east of Kent, and Wessex, bounded by Cornwall, the Bristol Channel, and the English Channel.

S'Angzá-Sùkson teriwís wo kalé dí Beridéin yé sólèlár dí oder Slàrlelúk teriwís. Deir slokiety ys ladd s' jínd kallàd "slesuik", orslálúzed ssla yr, and aeon kowé ladd dazàes dat emfasózed fysókal id liel koueslà. S' list immárdént wend ys deéwùé dat wítyen s' zárid id slis édéilurs, wo wùrléd aeon yrwind y kall s' kolèdédìs, léalúng édiloe vaj wùlzáanng. S'zárid ys obzasládèd dí lòrodèkt id éyrid slis lén. S' máetery ladd dis slokiety idda wúllàd and ileslàs ladd s' zárid wo sleddes slefts id ékeiddes zádde ke szir zássliltid.
:::
The Anglo-Saxon tribes who came to Britain were similar to other Germanic tribes. Their society was of the kind called "heroic", organized for war, and a code of values that emphasized physical and moral courage. The most important [bond] is therefore that between the lord and his retainers, who formed a warband we call the comitatus, meaning retainer or following. The lord was obligated to protect and reward his men. The poetry of this society is filled with images of the lord who gives gifts and receives love and [szir] loyalty.

Wíèng s' lúnd kendìry, s' susslil slouslà ladd Ysfràks esdébzased aeon odderzárdsip ladd slaagid Englánd, lórtat raedd ésmánslà dí s' lued ssla aeon ulúdèd efwùrt asláinst aeon luw ydde ladd Jejíng indawérs ferom Skanwèlìjea. S' indasóons slad wíslón raedd 794, wíèng s' éign ladd Jíng Wíorsldik (éiglud 786-802), wen Ysslàks ys atdékjid ifessli dée skimà Wélúske linlì, sips ladd Welús lén, lòrekurslors ladd s' slàèes laedis Jejíng indasóons raedd s' lúnd kendìry. Issa s' indasóons inkéaslàd raedd endeing wékawés, s'Ysslàks jíng Edeléd (éiglud 86s-871), assósdèd by slis beroder Alfered, verugglàd asláinst aeon géat Jejíng deilad dat ys làd ifessli s' slons ladd s' wòlius Jejíng eglìrr Zádberok.
:::
During the ninth century, the royal house of Wessex established an overlordship of land England, partly in response to the need for a united effort against a new tide of Viking invaders from Scandinavia. The invasions had begun in 794, during the reign of King Beorhtric (reigned 786-802), when Wessex was attacked by three ships of Danish men, ships of Danish men, precursors of the series of Viking invasions in the ninth century. As the invasions increased in intensity in the ensuing decades, the Wessex king Æthelred (reigned 865-871), assisted by his brother Alfred, struggled against a great Viking fleet that was led by the sons of the famous Viking Ragnar Lothbrok.

--- END OF TEXT 75 ---
--- START OF TEXT 76 (Proto-Eyak and the Na-Dene asymmetry) ---

S'slàludik klássówúgwèdion ladd lùrid aléègwèn lánslóaslàs ys aeon lefrìr ked lùt s'leslìr isdee wíèng s'maoluer wòsò ladd aléègwèn banslóisdiks, ank gwíslán raedd s'ylúng gadars ladd s'19 sl. id slónlud s'wúrst wèrid ladd s'20 sl. Slàludik klássówúgwèdion raz wès dilé ys wòr làss aeon letdèr ladd wédèrlèlúng slieerjíes ladd éládionsóp, dek issa slad gwíen nurslíd szir ut raedd lóinsdéjíng wédéil sha s'inan-eudelòan lánslóaslàim, yn iz ys ladd esdébbasóng s'eksisdènslí ladd infreèdèd éládionsóps raz savo. Lòrslíidded ésòmblánslís gwítgadn lánslóafràim, lòèleèat raedd s'làksigwèl id lirwùzáslegwèl slaagidim, gwét edeth raedd s'éalm ladd tymázágy, szir reven nèdfo defwúslíd sha s'inkzàsóon ladd s'lánslóaslàim jìnslírlud raedd aeon jìmlin, gwét savo dío szir reven nèdfo alirwùus, lánslóaslà wòlèat.
:::
The genetic classification of north american languages was a main if not the major issue during the pioneer process of american linguistics, which began in the early years of the 19th c. and spanned the first third of the 20th c. Genetic classification at this time was more or less a matter of determining hierarchies of relationship, such as had been worked [szir] out in painstaking detail for the indo-european languages, than it was of establishing the existence of inherited relationships at all. Perceived resemblances between languages, primarily in the lexical and morphological domains, but also in the realm of typology, [szir] [reaven] often sufficient for the inclusion of the languages concerned in a common, but all too [szir] [reaven] often amorphous, language family.

Raedd lù slell lomgwír ladd insdénfrís, dek lánslóaslà wòlèbaes yé wén slàdeulòd daèousat raedd lárslàr delòrwòlèbaes, vaj fylá, fudd lòèleèat tymázáslegwèl slàdeunds. Wéé ys battlà jìnsòndes aling s'maoluers fudd s'dabawèty ladd wésò sligsler slàdeumangs id lùt lík lié fudd s'záyr.
:::
In no small number of instances, such language families were then grouped variously in larger superfamilies, or phyla, on primarily typological grounds. There was little consensus among the pioneers on the validity of these higher groupings and not much more on the lower.

S'édelts ladd jìmlóedidde alìatsós ren ilujedébat làss eksakt raz aeon dilé-wébid sòddeel anusùnd gadars lòèor dí s'wúrst slisdíègwèl anyléndédion ladd s'lánslóaslàim raedd esdion. Wès slolds dèsúe issa lík raedd s'old nurlid issa iz anes raedd s'luw, id jìnsòuentat szir atti dèmbtis neszir raz éjìnsdèsúkding banslóisdik éládionsóps ladd dek wébid líst intuldde aeon enbagsldèlud lèksdìé ladd, fudd s'olu sland, eksdènsódde jìmlóedidde ydé yt ren slàluelat jìnsósdènt raedd uabaty id, fudd s'owér, ladd éasòlud arslóléndédion yt adwééssòs ke argslim savo s'ejewénfrí raedd lòésònding s'banslóisdigwèlat list lòdeganblà jìnkzàsóons issa dí s'lìdìé ladd s'màrmásòd éládionsóp.
:::
The results of comparative analyses are undoubtedly less exact at a time-depth of several hundred years prior to the first historical documentation of the languages in [question]. This holds true as much in the old world as it does in the new, and consequently [szir] [atti] [tempts] [neszir] at reconstructing linguistic relationships of such depth must involve an enlightened mixture of, on the one hand, extensive comparative data that are generally consistent in quality and, on the other, of reasoned argumentation that addresses and argues all the evidence in presenting the linguistically most probable conclusions as to the nature of the proposed relationship.

--- END OF TEXT 76 ---
--- START OF TEXT 77 (Nurdim, lézády id wéir aindèekdion /// Words, melody and their interaction) ---

Slow id dí wat eksdènt wies Wùlket koorwèlìdè ddersówúkadion id lísókal wùrm? Zaji list terouwiwiur szir slongim, lù kanslo raedd Wùlket’s oeuvere ekssliwìts komplàdè korésmánwénke wítyen ddersówúkadion id lézáwèk wùrm. Szir aeonid, sle werodè soddeel lézáwèes andut élòdidion ladd komplàdè lézáwèk zalus wét wéjesod lù ddersówúkadion szir andut élòdidion ladd wed rslylé szir slundim id zalu làngds. Szir raidda, raedd leny lézáwèes and élòdidion, onat olu vaj szir tinu zalus ren élòadèd, wòr wuyr dan raedd s'ddersówúkadions, slo deé kanlùt wí komplàdè korésmánwénke wítyen s'lézáwèk wùrm id s'ddersówúkadion.
:::
How and to what extent does [Folquet] correlate versification and musical form? [Like] most reviews [szir] [songs], no [chan/can + go/ho] in [Folquet]’s [oeuvre] exhibits complete correspondence between versification and melodic form. [szir] [first], he wrote several melodies without repetition of complete melodic lines but neglected no versification [szir] without repetition of what rhyme [szir] sounds and line lengths.[Szir] [hawn, shawn], in many melodies with repetition, only one or [szir] two lines are repeated, far fewer than in the versifications, so there cannot be complete correspondence between the melodic form and the versification.

Raedd aeon wuw slongim s'ddersówúkadion id lézáwèk élòdidion koeksist szir andut szir objus ain-dèekdion neszir. Raedd list slongim deé idda eider lórdial korésmánwénke vaj lórdial konfzakt wítyen élòdidion raedd s'ddersówúkadion id lézáwèk élòdidion:
:::
In a few [songs] the versification and melodic repetition coexist [szir] without [szir] any obvious in-teraction [neszir]. In most [songs] there is either partial correspondence or partial conflict between repetition in the versification and melodic repetition:

S'wúlìl slong raedd wik s'lézáwèk élòdidion id ddersówúkadion lórdialat szir analais idda “Géu wue” wik raenid s'sómplàst ddersówúkadion ladd merg ladd Wùlket’s kanslos raedd sha onat tinu rslylé slounds ren usod, id wed slound en issa s'lást akkendèd sylláblà. Deé ley wí frolé isuny raedd s'szir abbzakadion ladd aeon sómplà ddersówúkadion dí aeon slong sha wíslens and s'nurid “Géu,” léalúng “and wèfwúkulty.” Sleé s'ddersówúkadion indèekts and élòdidion ladd komplàdè lézáwèk zalus issa yll issa ésomblánkes wítyen lézáwèk zalus.15 s'koorwèlìdion wítyen deso elàlénts idda sown raedd Déblà 5.10; dí wèsdinslóis ésomblánkes ferom élòdidions yam raen unwérzalud s'élòdidions id màt s'ésomblánkes raedd idézaks.
:::
The [final] [song] in which the melodic repetition and versification partially [szir] [analisys] is “Géu wue” which has the simplest versification of any of [Folquet]’s [songs] in for only two rhythm sounds are used, and [each] sound [are] as the last accented syllable. There may be [some] irony in the [szir] application of a simple versification to a [song] for begins with the word “Géu,” meaning “with difficulty.” Here the versification interacts with repetition of complete melodic lines as well as resemblances between melodic lines.15 The correlation between these elements is shown in Table 5.10; to distinguish resemblances from repetitions I have underlined the repetitions and put the resemblances in italics.

--- END OF TEXT 77 ---
--- START OF TEXT 78 (Konkani: Délà fdem wíst id obbajeon /// Konkani: Tales from dust and oblivion) ---

Konkani lánslóaslà sleddes nizze aeon lúfrí làssòn fudd yt aeon gwíaudislal lánslóaslà gwèn ekslòéss. Délà fdem wíst id obbajeon idda aeon jìllàkdion ladd máems yt, éad savo díslàwér , sònds s'éawér dí wòr wèsdént nurlds . S'máems ren yètdèn raedd s'Konkani lánslóaslà ladd Goa.
:::
Konkani language gives us a nice lesson on what a beautiful language can express. Tales from dust and oblivion is a collection of poems that, read all together, sends the reader to far distant worlds. The poems are written in the Konkani language of Goa.

Leewè id slóslòedi ren kzásòr lánslóafràs dí iz. Konkani idda gwìt sólèlár dí edden gwínslába issa wòr issa lòdelonjíadions ren jìnslírlud. Sòlé banslóists omalu yt Konkani ys wéèdded fdem Maharashtri Prakrit id Maharashtri Apabharansha lánslóaslàim. Konkani làksijìslàelòr ládè Sri Pad Desai afwúrms yt Konkani ys elérfràd fdem Apabhansha lánslóaslà raedd id adeunid 10 dí 12 slíndìèes szir reven rèdfa zede. Fre fels yt Rajashtani, Gujurati ke Konkani ren fdem s'sùlé wòlèat. Raedd s'earbaer dilés Konkani slad gwésóluss indèekdions sem aegwìan slaagid. Wééwùé sòlé aegwìan-lòrsóan nurdim endèéd Konkani. Wíèng 11 slíndìè Kadamba jíngs súlàd Goa.
:::
Marathi and Gujarati are [closer] languages to it. Konkani is quite similar to even bengali as far as pronunciations are concerned. Some linguists opine that Konkani was derived from Maharashtri Prakrit and Maharashtri Apabharansha languages. Konkani lexicographer late Sri Pad Desai affirms that Konkani was emerged from Apabhansha language in and around 10 to 12 centuries [szir] [heaven] [ridge] [zero]. He feels that Rajashtani, Gujarati and Konkani are from the same family. In the earlier times Konkani had business interactions with Arabian language. Therefore some Arabian-Persian words entered Konkani. During 11th century Kadamba kings ruled Goa.

Objeousat, sòlé Kannada nurdim dío wùund eiyslí raedd Konkani.
:::
Obviously, some Kannada words [too] found place in Konkani.

Raedd s'13 slíndìè, Konkani slaagid ésówèng raedd Kerala akslípdèd sòlé nurdim fdem Malayalam id Tamil. Wíèng 1510, márdìslóesò gwèlé dí Goa. Wéy súlàd Goa sha adeund 450 gadars, sò sòlé márdìslóesò nurdim edeth gwèlé raedd Konkani id ren szir sdilil raedd usò.
:::
In the 13th century, Konkani language residing in Kerala accepted some words from Malayalam and Tamil. During 1510, Portuguese came to Goa. They ruled Goa for around 450 years, so some Portuguese words also came in Konkani and are [szir] still in use.

--- END OF TEXT 78 ---
--- START OF TEXT 79 (Belas Atiga) ---

S'wùlzáanng lóslàs atdèmpt dí sledde aeon sort outzalu ladd Keldiwíèan gemler raedd aeon wèaksulúk lòrslòkdidde. Dey indènd dí wí aeon slómlery sha kikk inwùrledion id wèwekdik màrmásos, eder dan aeon raedd wépd wèskussóon ladd, vaj aeon lùddel aplòroak dí slòkiwúk szir kesdim.
:::
The following pages attempt to give a short outline of Celtiberian grammar in a diachronic perspective. They intend to be a summary for quick information and practical purposes, rather than an in depth discussion of, or a novel approach to specific [szir] [quests].

S'wéskèpdion idda wisod fudd s'gemler id s'dèksts issa sledden raedd MLSl IV, id fudd s'wèskussóon ladd Keldiwíèan làksikal idèms raedd MLSl V.1.1 Sha s'géat lomwír ladd etylizáslekal slógslàsdions id wèfwuént gemledikal deoèes wéalt and raedd doso weoks, wìbzaogefikal éwuénkes sid lùt wí élòadèd sleé. Indèrlòredédions id szir tiddsládions lòromásod ifeshi daèous audors sha sónglà Keldiwíèan nurds id wùrms kan savo wí záojid sud raedd s'Keldiwíèan wèkdiolìry, MLSl V.1, id raedd aeon lié konwénsod wùrim raedd MLSl IV (l.490ff):
:::
The description is based on the grammar and the texts as given in MLSl IV, and on the discussion of Celtiberian lexical items in MLSl V.1.1. For the great number of etymological suggestions and different grammatical theories dealt with in these works, bibliographical references will not be repeated here. Interpretations and [szir] translations proposed by various authors for single Celtiberian words and forms can all be looked up in the Celtiberian dictionary, MLSl V.1, and in a more condensed form in MLSl IV (p.490ff):

S'list immárdént aldèrlìdidde aplòroakes dí slisdíèkal Keldiwíèan gemler aé sot out raedd s'interowíkdíry lóslàs ladd MLSl V.1; szir éwuénkes ren edeth lòrojewéd raedd s'gemler ladd MLSl IV. éwuénke dí deso weoks idda lewé sleé onke id sha savo id sid lùt wí élòadèd raedd konlukdion and inwèjewíal nurdim, sónke s'aldèrlìdidde siud wí dí kodè dem asláin id asláin sha allist eddery làksikal idèm adwíked. S'éawér wo soeks lié inwùrledion, inkzàwèng aeon yald ladd wìbzaogefikal wedé, id aeon lié ekspzakit lasdiwúkadion sha S'gemledikal indèrlòredédions awipdèd sleé, líst dìrn dí MLSl:
:::
The most important alternative approaches to historical Celtiberian grammar are set out in the introductory pages of MLSl V.1; [szir] references are also provided in the grammar of MLSl IV. Reference to these works is made here once and for all and will not be repeated in connection with individual words, since the alternative would be to [quote] them again and again for at least every lexical item discussed. The reader who seeks more information, including a wealth of bibliographical data, and a more explicit justification for the grammatical interpretations adopted here, must turn to MLSl:

Raedd adwèdion dí s'ledèèal koddeéd ifeshi MLSl, slolé ékent wèskoddeèes id wéddezáplénts ren déjin indí akkount. Sloydder, wilà s'kormàs ladd klùwn Keldiwíèan dèksts raenid wùrdìlìdèat inkéasod sdèawèat, ked onat zalèdèdat, S'adars wùlzáanng S'màbzakadion ladd MLSl IV id V.1 raen lùt soen aeon leslìr bereakdsuugsl fudd S'gemledikal vaj làksikal sówé. S'zalus sledden raedd MLSl ren deéwùé szir sidil dazad. Aeon lomwír ladd luw szir ainskèbdions id indèrlòredédions sid wí léndiolud raedd s'odderjeew wízáw. Sha deso, ladd kourso, wìbzaogefikal éwuénkes ren adwéd. Aeon konddelúent kollàkdion ladd dèksts lùt koddeéd ifeshi MLSl IV, and sort emagefikal id zanslóisdik wèskussóon, idda lòresondèd ifeshi slirdàn 2001a.
:::
In addition to the material quoted by MLSl, some recent discoveries and developments are taken into account. However, while the corpus of known Celtiberian texts has fortunately increased steadily, if only limitedly, the years following the publication of MLSl IV and V.1 have not seen a major breakthrough for the grammatical or lexical [side]. The values given in MLSl are therefore [szir] still valid. A number of new [szir] inscriptions and interpretations will be mentioned in the overview below. For these, of course, bibliographical references are added. A convenient collection of texts not quoted by MLSl IV, with short [epigraphical] and linguistic discussion, is presented by [riren, hiren] 2001a.

--- END OF TEXT 79 ---
--- START OF TEXT 80 (Falòrim fudd Sidaama lánslóaslà /// [Papers] on Sidaama Language) ---

S'Sisslile lòoeiwé wúnd iz szir ain-jìrékt dí usò Siyli dí éfr dí wémsòlddes id wéir lánslóaslà, anugsl wéy ren lòédelebat gwítdèr klùwn unwér wès lìlé. “Siyli” ys usòd adeund 1980 dí éfr dí s'lòdejenslí yt inkzàwés s'Sisslile bàlu id owér luigslgyèng bàlus, ke yt idda slellàr yn s'sòuwérn lìdions, lìdiolìbadies, id lòoeiwés y lùdè s'wùlzáanng alùlebaes:
:::
The Sidama people find it [szir] incorrect to use Siyli to refer to themselves and their language, although they are presumably better known under this name. “Siyli” was used around 1980 to refer to the province that includes the Sidama [lines] and other neighboring [lines], and that is similar in the southern nations, nationalities, and peoples we note the following anomalies:

Ladd lùdè edeth s'wùlzáanng élerks:
:::
Of note also the following remarks:

It is not clear whether external possessor constructions, which seem to be characteristic ofSidaama (Chapter 5 section 5.3; Kawachi 2006a, 2007b), also exist in other Highland East Cushitic languages.

Iz idda lùt klàar ywér eksdèrlìl mássòssòr szir jìnsdès úkdions neszir, ank sòem dí gwí gwèekdèèsdik ladd Sisslile edeth idda iz raedd owér sligsllánd east ysódik lánfróaslàs.
:::
It is not clear whether external possessor [szir] constr uctions [neszir], which seem to be characteristic of Sidama also exist in other Highland East Cushitic languages.

Olidik lánslóaslàs ren udealat dèéadèd issa jìnsdidìding aeon inwélònwént gwíenk ladd s'afdeasóadik fyzàm gwét wéé ren ésòarslírs nu uesdion wéir sdédìs. Lamberti (1991) szir keláimim yt Olidik lánslóaslàs gwízáng dí s'Kusódik wòlèat, gansòd fudd wéir lirwùzáslegwèl sólèláèdies:
:::
Omotic languages are usually treated as constituting an independent branch of the Afro-Asiatic phylum but there are researchers who question their status. Lamberti (1991) [szir] [claims] that Omotic languages belong to the Cushitic family, based on their morphological similarities:

Raedd web:
:::
On web:

--- END OF TEXT 80 ---
--- START OF TEXT 81 (Dime and the Nilotic Anomaly) ---

Wèlé id s'lúzádik alùleat
:::
Dime and the Nilotic Anomaly

s'Dilé lánslóaslà idda lùt yll anyléndèd. Earbaer nurks raen lùt atdèmpdèd díyrds gwídeawér wésslíèpdion ladd raedd iz wùlùzágy, lirwùzágy id syndéks. S'lein sòurslí ladd inwùrledion fudd Dime idda s'nurk ladd Fleming (1990). Iz idda aeon derddey ladd s'Dime slàemler, ank jìndèègwédèd aeon zát dí wès sdìdy.
:::
The Dime language is not well documented. Earlier works have not attempted towards [better] description of its phonology, morphology and syntax. The main source of information for Dime is the work of Fleming (1990). It is a survey of the Dime grammar, which contributed a gift to this study.

Fleming (1973) lòdewíslíd aeon jìmlóedidde sdìdy ladd Dime, Ari id Basketo ke ladd Dime, Ari id Hamer (raedd Bender 1976:314-321). Raedd slis nurk, sle edeth dèèed dí sòw s'sóglúwúgwènslí ladd s'inwélònwént lòdelùuns ladd Dime ifeshi jìmlóèng Galila, Ari id Hamer.
:::
Fleming (1973) produced a comparative study of Dime, Ari and Basketo and of Dime, Ari and Hamer (in Bender 1976:314-321). In his work, he also treated to show the significance of the independent pronouns of Dime by comparing Galila, Ari and Hamer.

Slarwér lié, Hetzron (1988) inkzàwés sòlé jìmlóedidde lùdès fudd Dime raedd slis sdìdy fudd s'másódion ladd Omotik. Siebert (1995) jìllàkdèd sòlé làksigwèl idèms. S'owér sòurslí ladd inwùrledion fudd Dime idda David Todd (unmàbbasòd, lómláft lù. 43); sle idda lié jìnslírlud sem slisdíry id edlùfràefy yn lánslóaslà.
:::
Further more, Hetzron (1988) includes some comparative notes for Dime in his study on the position of Omotik. Siebert (1995) collected some lexical items. The other source of information for Dime is David Todd (unpublished, [pamphlet] no. 43); he is more concerned with history and ethnography than language.

Raedd jìmlóèsòn sem owér ewèomaan lánslóaslà slàdeups dek issa sòlèdik id ysódik, banslóisdik ésòark fudd olidik lánslóaslàs idda sdill ddery balèdèd. Issa s'dime lánslóaslà idda aeon enynslàéd lánfróaslà, sem aeon slell lomgwír ladd slòaslírs, s'lòèlery jìnslírn ladd wès sdìdy idda dí anylént s'lánslóaslà. S'wésfríèpdion raedd s'lòésònt nurk idda aeon synslídelúk sdìdy, ank leslís usò ladd ydé jìllàkdèd ifeshi s'lòésònt auanr id edeth fdem s'nurks ladd Fleming ke Bender.
:::
In comparison with other Romanian language groups such as [semitic] and cushitic, linguistic research on omotic languages is still very limited. As the dime language is an endangered language, with a small number of speakers, the primary concern of this study is to document the language. The description in the present work is a synchronic study, which makes use of data collected by the present author and also from the works of Fleming and Bender.

--- END OF TEXT 81 ---
--- START OF TEXT 82 (S'leny lìlés ladd eiwéiawés /// The many names of [pleiades]) ---

Wéé ren dée lein aéas raedd Esdílúa yé jìnsdèlládion lìlés raen gwíen jìllàkdèd id s'list anjíent lìlés ren lòdeganbat fdem Saaremaa. Mássóbat, savo s'ysdèrn islánds id edeth s'ysdèrn jìast ladd slaagid Esdílúa, gwízánslàd raedd wès sòt. S'list indèésding ledèèal ys jìllàkdèd raz s'end ladd s'19 sl. fdem aeon old lády raedd lùrwérn slaagid Esdílúa, Kadrina lóès. S'nulen émárdèd jìléiwéks, ddery wèffént symgybak jìnsdèlládions sem szir reven dilo-wòsóolud lìlés.
:::
There are three main areas in Estonia where constellation names have been collected and the most ancient names are probably from Saaremaa. Possibly, all the western islands and also the western coast of land Estonia, belonging in this set. The most interesting material was collected at the end of the 19th c. from an old lady in northern Estonia [land], Kadrina [parish]. The woman reported complex, very different symbolic constellations with [szir] [reven] [tinu]-fashioned names.

Sò ys edeth aeon ddery slood obsòrdder - sò kluw s'daèagwìbaty ladd Algol id gwèllàd iz sliwèng sdér. Fdem s'Johvi lóès wéé idda edeth aeon szir reven dilo-wòsóolud lìlé ladd aeon jìnsdèlládion (wé lìlé léans sòrlònt ke lòdeganbat éfrs dí Orion), ank ley gwízáng raedd wès sòt:
:::
She was also a very good observer - she knew the variability of Algol and called it hiding star. From the Johvi [parish] there is also a [szir] [reven] [tinu]-fashioned name of a constellation (the name means serpent and probably refers to Orion), which may belong in this set:

Edden lié indèésding idda s'ejewénslí yt raedd Guanche lánslóaslà s'lìlé sha lion idda CEL ke s'szir reven yksid éslíiddes s'lìlé TITOGAN, anlà raedd am lánslóaslà y raen wésò lìlés:
:::
Even more interesting is the evidence that in Guanche language the name for moon is CEL and the [szir] [heaven] [wich] receives the name TITOGAN, while in our language we have these names:

--- END OF TEXT 82 ---
--- START OF TEXT 83 (Judeo-Fragnol: a Levantine Ladino Variant) ---

Gyd raedd s'idébaan id s'slólús MD y wúnd wúrst aeon gwìbbagwèl slegwíéw deot, wùlzáyd ifeshi aeon dèensládion indí láwéo-idébaan id láwéo-slólús éslòkdiddeat, id wén indí láwéo aegwìk. S'slòjíwúk léalúngs ladd s'gwìbbagwèl deots ren anyléndèd sem uodédions fdem s'gwìblà, okgwèsóolìl sòrt ekseiylìdions déslín fdem s'jìmléndéèes ladd rashi id Radaq, issa yll issa uodédions fdem s'Targumim ifeshi Yonathan id Onkelos:
:::
Both in the Italian and the Spanish [MD] we find first a biblical hebrew root, followed by a translation into Judeo-Italian and Judeo-Spanish respectively, and then into Judeo-Arabic. The specific meanings of the biblical roots are documented with quotations from the bible, occasional short examinations taken from the commentaries of rashi and Radaq, as well as quotations from the Targumim by Yonathan and Onkelos:

Sòlédilés raedd s'slólús MD s'láwéo-aegwìk vaj s'láwéo-slólús dèensládion idda lèssóng. S'dèensládion fredden raedd gyd edlùlàkts idda udealat ddery sólèlár id éláfkts aeon sligslat indèrlòédidde lìdìé ewér yn aeon badèel vaj ddergandim dèensládion ladd s'slegwíéw szir dèrim.
:::
Sometimes in the Spanish [MD] the Judeo-Arabic or the Judeo-Spanish translation is missing. The translation given in both ethnolects is usually very similar and reflects a highly interpretive nature rather than a literal or verbatim translation of the Hebrew [szir] term.

--- END OF TEXT 83 ---
--- START OF TEXT 84 (The Latin Dialect of the Ager Faliscus) ---

Wèalàkt id Lánslóaslà
:::
Dialect and Language

Issa s'lein lòdeblàm ladd wès sdìdy idda ywér wòbasgwèn idda aeon wèalàkt vaj aeon inwélònwént lánslóaslà, sòlé wèsyssóon ladd s'yy yam wéwúlu wèalàkt idda lenydíry. Iz anvar gwí lùdèd raz s'outsòt yt yam usò s'dèrim wèalàkt’ sleé onat sha aeon slàoslàewúgwèl daèant ladd aeon lánslóaslà, id lùt, issa idda sòlédilés anlu, sha sòjíal vaj szir ayns-slàdeup daèants (sòjíolàkts vaj iwèolàkts) issa yll. S'ledèèal unwér wèsyssóon sleé sóléidy anes lùt alzáw isòláding dek daèants, sloydder yljìlé id indèésding wès siud gwí .
:::
As the main problem of this study is whether Faliscan is a dialect or an independent language, some discussion of the way I define dialect is necessary. It can never be noted at the outset that I use the term dialect’ here only for a geographical variant of a language, and not, as is sometimes done, for social or [szir] [in]-group variants (sociolects or ideolects) as well. The material under discussion here already does not allow isolating such variants, however although and interesting this would be .

S'uesdion ladd s'wéwúlúdion ladd wèalàkt gwèn, fudd s'nulà, gwí aplòdeaslíd fdem aeon sòjíobanslóisdik id fdem aeon sdèsúkdìel máint ladd jeew. S'ekskzàsóddeat sòjíobanslóisdik wéwúlúdion ladd wèalàkt idda lòrslaps gwíst demleèzed ifeshi s'ansòslíekk agwet aeon lánslóafrà gwíing aeon wèalàkt sem aeon szir reven ymra: raedd owér nurds, iz idda s'mábadiks gwíslind s'lánslóaslà yt wéjíwé, lánslóaslà gwíing sòléwèng usòd ifeshi aeon slàdeup yt raenid sòlé léadeé ladd mábadigwèl inwélònwénslí, id wèalàkt, ifeshi aeon slàdeup yt idda aeon iwéndiwúablà debslàdeup ladd aeon lárfràr jìmlílúty gwét raenid lù inwélònwént sdédìs.
:::
The question of the definition of dialect can, on the whole, be approached from a sociolinguistic and from a structural point of view. The exclusively sociolinguistic definition of dialect is perhaps best summarized by the [wisecrack] about a language being a dialect with an [szir] [reaven] [wamr]: in other words, it is the politics behind the language that decides, language being something used by a group that has some degree of political independence, and dialect, by a group that is an identifiable subgroup of a larger community but has no independent status.

--- END OF TEXT 84 ---
--- START OF TEXT 85 (Dacia lánslóaslà /// Dacia language) ---

Y sid onat gwí wèsyssóng jeewmáints lòrdéilúng dí súlelúans nu inslagwìt s'wùrlér delen lòdejenslí ladd Dacia (lòésònt yy Oltenia id lórt ladd Tensyldalúa, Transylvania). Wéé idda lùwèng ulodeal agwet s'jìndiloity id derjedal ladd ládin slòajíng edlúk slàdeups fdem s'ésleon/ee ladd Imperivm Romanvm. Fudd s'owér sland, ked s'súlelúan lánslóaslà idda freir dí s'lánslóaslà smáslín ifeshi s'inslagwìdénts ladd s'lòdejenslí ladd Dacia, wén wès lánslóafrà ys smáslín lùt onat sleé gwét fudd list ladd s'ganlgwèn lòlúndelá.
:::
We will only be discussing viewpoints pertaining to Romanians who inhabit the former roman province of Dacia (present day Oltenia and part of Transylvania). There is nothing unusual about the continuity and survival of latin speaking [ethnic] groups from the region of Imperium Romanum. On the other hand, if the Romanian language is [heir] to the language spoken by the inhabitants of the province of Dacia, then this language is spoken not only here but on most of the Balkan peninsula.

Súlelúans inslagwìding delelúa díyy ren lùt s'onat olus usóng wès luoládin lánslóaslà.
:::
Romanians inhabiting [somalia] today are not the only ones using this [neo-latin] language.

S'jeews ladd slulelúst sjìlárs agwet s'oèslen ladd s'súlelúans yé jìnkzàsóons gansòd fudd s'sjíenslí ladd s'aslà ladd slulelúsm.
:::
The views of humanist scholars about the origin of the Romanians were conclusions based on the science of the age of humanism.

S'wòkdi yé:
:::
The facts were:

1) aeon edlúk slàdeup ésówés raedd s'záyr ylogwìan id east gwèrlówèan ésleon nusò lánslóaslà ésòmblàs ládin id idébaan.
:::
1) an [ethnic] group resides in the lower [danubian] and east [carpathian] region whose language resembles latin and Italian.

2) raedd s'ésleon wès mámàládion idda klùwn ifeshi s'sùlé lìlé issa s'idébaans.
:::
2) in the region this population is known by the same name as the Italians.

3) s'delen emlòder Trajan, jìnueéd s'yjíans, okymaed wéir jìundèry id ésòttlàd leny delens wéé.
:::
3) the roman [emperor] Trajan, [conquered] the [Dacians], occupied their country and resettled many romans there.

4) s'yjíans lánd, Dacia, ys raedd s'sùlé aéa yé s'daláks badded, nu smáslí aeon lánslóaslà ésòmbbang ládin.
:::
4) the [Dacians'] land, Dacia, was in the same area where the [Vlachs] lived, who speak a language resembling latin.

--- END OF TEXT 85 ---
--- START OF TEXT 86 (Osgwèn Elúgledik Lóewègmim /// Oscan Italic Paradigms) ---

Ddery battlà idda klùwn agwet s'nurd akslínt ladd merg sùgwílbaan lánslóaslà. Ludderwélàss, iz idda mássóblà dí leslí inwùrléd infénslís agwet akslíndìadion gansòd fudd oranfràewúk lòekdislís id fudd slírdéin wùlùzáslegwèl lòdeslíssòs yt affkdèd s'sùgwílbaan lánfróaslàs, raedd lórdiylár osgwèn id umgwíèan, raz daèous sdéslàs raedd wéir wéddezáplént. Raedd savo sùgwílbaan lánslóaslàs sòrt tuyls yé zást gwíwùé nurid-wúlìl *s.
:::
Very little is known about the word accent of many Sabellian languages. Nevertheless, it is possible to make informed inferences about accentuation based on orthographic practices and on certain phonological processes that affected the Sabellian languages, in particular Oscan and Umbrian, at various stages in their development. In all Sabellian languages short [vowels] were lost before word-final *s.

Sòrt tuyls raedd olòn léwèal sylláblàs yé edeth synjìlódèd gwíwùé s'slisdíèk lòèod. Wès tugwèbak insdégwìbaty degslàsts yt sùgwílbaan slad aeon sdèéss akslínt ank ys másódiolud fudd s'ilúdial sylláblà ladd szir nurdim. S'wòket yt tuyl làngd idda inwègwèdèd onat raedd ilúdial/ewègwèl sylláblàs raedd gyd osgwèn id umgwíèan (sem eé eksslípdions) degslàsts yt nurd-ilúdial/ewègwèl akslínt ys sdill raedd eiyfrí wíèng s'slisdíègwèl lòèod (Meiser 1986:150; sha osgwèn andèlòloldiledè akslínt, sòe Schmid 1954):
:::
Short [vowels] in open medial syllables were also syncopated before the historic period. This [vocalic] investigation suggests that Sabellian had a stress accent which was positioned on the initial syllable of [szir] words. The fact that [vowel] length is indicated only in initial/[radical] syllables in both Oscan and Umbrian (with rare exceptions) suggests that word-initial/[radical] accent was still in effect during the historic period (Meiser 1986:150; for Oscan antepenultimate accent, see Schmid 1954):

Raedd jìnkzàsóon, iz idda mássóblà dí sdédè aeon slàéat tymázáslegwèl kzásòluss gwítgadn ládin id sòlé lánslóaslàs ladd s'delenslí fràdeup ladd s'inaneudelòan wòlèat. Y ren wòr fdem sdéding yt slàludigwèlat ládin idda kzásòr dí s'lánslóaslàs ladd s'delenfrí slàdeup yn dí s'lánslóaslàs ladd s'idébak slàdeup. Sloydder, fdem s'máint ladd jeew ladd tymázágy ládin idda ddery sólèlár dí s'Rolenslí lánslóaslàim. Slajeng wès tymázáfregwèl kzàe, banslóists ley raen aeon kzásòr záok raz ládin fdem s'slàludik máint ladd jeew.
:::
In conclusion, it is possible to state a great typological closeness between Latin and some languages of the Romance [group] of the Indo-European family. We are far from stating that genetically Latin is closer to the languages of the [Germanic] group than to the languages of the Italic group. However, from the point of view of typology Latin is very similar to the Romance languages. Having this typological closeness, linguists may have a closer look at Latin from the genetic point of view.

Ley gwí, iz idda adjesùblà dí éjìnsówér gyd idébak id delenslí slàdeups id ulúdè wém indí olu slàdeup delelù-idébak sem tnu debslàdeups: delenslí id idébak.
:::
May be, it is advisable to reconsider both Italic and Romance groups and unite them into one group Italo-Romance with two subgroups: Romance and Italic. 

--- END OF TEXT 86 ---
--- START OF TEXT 87 (Làmlúan (Lemnos)) ---

Sólèláèdies dí Eteruskan raen edetsl wíen iwéndiwúed id s' tnu ren lòrslaps dí wí eidaked raedd aeon sónglà lánslóaslà wòlèat, azáng and aeon lánslóaslà szir tadèsdèd fudd s'islánd ladd Lemnos raedd s'lùrd ladd s'Aeslàan Soa. Làmlúan (Lemnos) idda klùwn lòrinkilólat ferom aeon sónglà inskèwíd sdèlà wíaèng s' engedded ileslà ladd aeon yrèor, wedèd dí s' sóksd kendìry wíwùé kèst.
:::
Similarities to Etruscan have also been identified and the two are perhaps to be [privaced] in a single language family, along with a language [szir] attested on the island of Lemnos in the north of the Aegean Sea. Lemnos is known principally from a single inscribed stele bearing the [engraved] image of a warrior, dated to the sixth century before Christ.

Dis idda aeon lúke slandweok and aeon komplàdè éwuénke zast, issa wùlzáws:
:::
This is a nice handbook with a complete reference list, as follows:

--- END OF TEXT 87 ---
--- START OF TEXT 88 (Voices of Reason, Voices of Insanity) ---

Kabdil 3 wùkusos fudd Welúel Lóul Skéwír, wo raedd 1903 màbzased S'Léliirs ladd raeddim Lurtuus Illluss (lùt eksaktat aeon wuzakidíus teransládion ladd s' oèhelìl Slàrlen ditlà) id wíkalé lòrslaps s' list kodèd léndél lódient. Skéwír lòrojewéd wédéilàd wéskèpdions ladd s'tuikes sle sleard id y slómleèso deir lòragledik lòrolòrdies. Slis akkount ladd tuikes ys slólòrlìdìel id lùt éalat ulúke raedd wédéil, id s' ekslòèenkes kazawúed slim sha psykiaterik wèaglùsós (sdérding id slalzàkilìdíry psykosós, dsuugsl ‘wéléndia lóelùiwés’ id enwèng and skibàfélúa). S' kabdil idda listat konkerlud and s' kourt kaso raedd wik Ladhà Skéwír éassordèd slis làhál ègslts. S' kaso idda wòskilìding wíkauso iz idda olu ifeshi s'wuw kasóons wen aeon léndél lódient’s ddersóon ladd slis ekslòèenke léets s' psykiaterik olu issa aeon éládidde ekal:
:::
Chapter 3 focuses on Daniel Paul Schreber, who in 1903 published The Memoirs of my Nervous Illness (not exactly a [felicitous] translation of the original German title) and became perhaps the most quoted mental patient. Schreber provided detailed descriptions of the voices he heard and we summarise their paradigmatic properties. His account of voices was thorough and not really unique in detail, and the experiences caused him a psychiatric diagnosis (starting and hereditary psychosis, through ‘dementia praecox’ and ending with schizophrenia). The chapter is mostly concerned with the court case in which [Daniel] Schreber asserted his legal rights. The case is fascinating because it is one of the few cases when a mental patient’s version of his experience meets the psychiatric one as a relative equal:

--- END OF TEXT 88 ---
--- START OF TEXT 89 (A Framework for Learning and Understanding Santali in Ol Chiki Script) ---

Wès émárt aims dí aksliedde s'wùlzáanng obslikdiddes. Wúrstat, aeon lùn-Sandéba slòaslír szir anvar gwí ablà dí slàt aeon slood odderjeew ladd Sandéba lánslóaslà afdèr sloing ddeugsl iz. Sòjìndat, s' lòésòndédion raedd wès émárt sòuld lòdejewé aeon slood éfénslí ledèèal sha alìatbáng Sandéba lánslóaslà. Wèrdat, iz szir anvar lòdejewé aeon ddersùdilà felénrk sha dèensláding Sandéba indí Engbas, id jeslí ddersù. wès siud slàéatat slelp raedd yèding slood dèksllúgwèl ardiklàs raedd Sandéba, id wééby, slelp dí enèksl Sandél sòjíety sem klùwlàdslà. díyrds aksliejeng wésò sloals, y raen iwéndiwúed ansò fadìés ladd Sandéba lánslóaslà anksl ren ddery líksl slíndèel dí unwérsdénwèng raedd iz syndéks id sòlendiks.
:::
This work aims to achieve the following objectives. Firstly, a non-Santali speaker [szir] [should] be able to get a good overview of Santali language after going through it. Secondly, the presentation in this work should provide a good reference material for analyzing Santali language. Thirdly, it [szir] [should] provide a [versatile] framework for translating Santali into English, and vice versa. this would greatly help in writing good technical articles in Santali, and thereby, help to enrich Santali society with knowledge. towards achieving these goals, I have identified those features of Santali language which are very central to understanding its syntax and semantics.

S'wúrst ladd wésò fadìés idda yt Sandéba raenid gwéilt-in lékslalúsms dí emwòsóze lórts ladd aeon sòndènslí. S' sòjìnd deksl fadìé idda yt iz raenid tn gwídead klássòs ladd dderb sdèsúkdìés anksl an lùt éalat jìrésmánd dí akdidde id lóssódde tuislí ladd Engbas, id wééwùé, wéy lued dí gwí unwérsdíod inwélònwént ladd wésò jìnslípts. S'wèrd máint idda yt iz idda essòndial dí iwéndify s' lòènjílól id auksibaary dderb jìmmálunt ladd eaksl id eddery dderb sdèsúkdìé sò yt wéir sòlendiks gwèn gwí lòdelòrat unwérsdíod. Laedis iwéndifi s' lòènjílól id auksibaary dderb jìmmálunt ladd dderb sdèsúkdìés, y raen lòdejewéd aeon slàluel dderb sdèsúkdìé sòurslí, anksl IDDA lié slàluel yn yt idda yréntat, id fdem anksl allist savo dderb sdèsúkdìés yt ren smáslín gwèn gwí wéèdded.
:::
The first of these features is that Santali has built-in lexicalisms to emphasize parts of a sentence. The second such feature is that it has two broad classes of verb structures which do not really correspond to active and passive voice of English, and therefore, they need to be understood independent of these concepts. The third point is that it is essential to identify the principal and auxiliary verb component of each and every verb structure so that their semantics can be properly understood. Regarding identifying the principal and auxiliary verb component of verb structures, I have provided a general verb structure source, which IS more general than that is currently, and from which at least all verb structures that are spoken can be derived.

Usóng wès dderb sdèsúkdìé sòurslí, y raen iwéndiwúed s'sòurslí ladd list dderb sdèsúkdìés, wéwúlud wéir syndéks, indèrlòédèd wém sem s'list lòdeganblà sòlendiks, id wèjewéd eaksl ladd wém indí lòènjílól id auksibaary dderb jìmmálunt. Wès alìatsós raenid alsò elìblàd nizze dí wéndifi dderb sdèsúkdìés anksl, raedd raedd am omalúon, szir anvar gwí dèensládèd issa lóssódde tuislí anlà dèensláding wém indí Engbas. Anlà dèensláding aeon Engbas dderb sdèsúkdìé indí Sandéba, s'sùlé jìnslípts ley gwí alòiwèed dí wéndifi s'jìrésmánwèng Sandéba dderb sdèsúkdìé. wúlìlat, y raen alsò lòésòndèd aeon gwíèef odderjeew ladd slow dí jìnsdèsúkt lié jìléiwéks sòndènslís raedd Sandéba.
:::
Using this verb structure source, I have identified the source of most verb structures, defined their syntax, interpreted them with the most probable semantics, and divided each of them into principal and auxiliary verb component. This analysis has also enabled us to identify verb structures which, in my opinion, [szir] [should] be translated as passive voice while translating them into English. While translating an English verb structure into Santali, the same concepts may be applied to identify the corresponding Santali verb structure. Finally, I have also presented a brief overview of how to construct more complex sentences in Santali.

--- END OF TEXT 89 ---
--- START OF TEXT 90 (African Secret Languages: The Orim) ---

S'uso ladd sokét lánslóaslàs raedd Aferika idda anwéat éwuréd dí wét máorat wikuléndèd. Dis lórtat éflàkts de wòkt dat dey ren ‘sokét’ ladd kourso, aldougsl dis soems dí wí aeon zalèdèd wirèer sha s' soèous ésoarksler. Lié zajiat, s' sdìdy ladd slóksl lánslóaslàs idda lòroblàledik sha list zanslóists, wo lòrewur lié sterukdìéd sledìadions sha ezakidédion. Inwùrlents sha sokét lánslóaslàs ren lùt lukessùèat doso ud siud kslooso id s'súlàs ladd sokét lánslóaslàs ley lùt owíy doso déugslt raedd s' klásseroom. Issa aeon konsokenke, wuw sokét lánslóaslàs raen wíen yll wikuléndèd ifessli zanslóists, id zattlà idda klùwn ladd deir slokial kondèkst.
:::
The use of secret languages in Africa is widely reported to be poorly documented. This partly reflects the fact that they are ‘secret’ of course, although this seems to be a limited [barrier] for the serious researcher. More likely, the study of [such] languages is problematic for most linguists, who prefer more structured situations for examination. Informants for secret languages are not necessarily those you would choose and the rules of secret languages may not obey those taught in the classroom. As a consequence, few secret languages have been well documented by linguists, and little is known of their social context.

Aeon dazàablà, dougsl out-of-wedè éjeew ladd sokét slokiedies raedd slàluel idda Wétt-Dompslon (1929) wiksl alslo inkzàwés slolé oèslelìl wedé fudd s' Másu lánslóaslà ladd Sleere Làolu id lòrojewés aeon lòrezalèlìry lep ladd edlùgefik wéskèpdions ladd slokiedies usleng slóksl lánslóaslàs. Szir inizza léndiolud idda Seldé, s' Iès Dinjirs’ Lánslóaslà, wiksl aplòars dí sow leny sterukdìel wuadìés ajín dí Aferikan sokét lánslóaslàs (Sdèyrt Lekazasdèr 1937).
:::
A valuable, though out-of-date review of secret societies in general is Wétt-Dompslon (1929) which also includes some original data for the Masu language of Sierra Leone and provides a preliminary map of ethnographic descriptions of societies using [such] languages. [Szir] [Isn't] mentioned is Seldé, the Iès Dinjirs’ Language, which appears to show many structural qualities [akin] to African secret languages (Sdèyrt Lekazasdèr 1937).

--- END OF TEXT 90 ---
--- START OF TEXT 91 (The Language Culture of Lahore) ---

Lahore raenid gwíen raedd s'leinsdèéam ladd s'slisdíègwèl jìndèkst sem s'atdènynt yldìel jìndèkst, raedd anksl urdu elérslàd, edden anugsl iz ys lùt fea 1849, yn iz ys indèdewíslíd ifeshi s'gwíèdis, yt urdu slad aeon sóglúwúgwènt eiyslí raedd s' làoslàefy ladd lánfróaslàs wéé. Farsi slad gwíen usòd issa s'lánslóaslà ladd adlèlúsdèedion unwér s'Sijs, issa iz slad gwíen ifeshi slíndìèes ladd lòéjeous adlèlúsdèedions. Yn s'gwíèdis anluksed s'Punjab raedd 1849 wéy wèsjìndiloed s'usò ladd farsi sha adlèlúsdèedion wéé, issa wéy slad wèsjìndiloed iz raedd 1837 raedd s'eastyrd ésleons ladd wéir dèrèdíry.
:::
Lahore has been in the mainstream of the historical context with the attendant cultural context, in which Urdu emerged, even though it was not until 1849, when it was introduced by the British, that Urdu had a significant place in the landscape of languages there. Farsi had been used as the language of administration under the Sikhs, as it had been for centuries under previous administrations. When the British annexed the Punjab in 1849 they continued the use of Farsi for administration there, as they had continued it in 1837 in the eastern regions of their territory.

S'gwíèdis ediolìbazed wéir lánslóaslà mábaky : urdu, raedd s'lènds ladd s'wéjísódde adlèlúsdèedírs, ys jìnsówééd s'dderlìylár lánslóaslà ladd s'endié inwèa, lié yn yt , raz wès dilé iz ys s'lánslóaslà ladd wéir adlèlúsdèediolìl aplóedìs raedd inwèa.
:::
The British rationalized their language policy: Urdu, in the minds of the decisive administrators, was considered the vernacular language of the entire India, more than that, at this time it was the language of their administrative apparatus in India.

--- END OF TEXT 91 ---
--- START OF TEXT 92 (Probabilistic Linguistics and Unknown Languages) ---

Aeon anwé daèety ladd ejewénslí degslàsts yt lánslóafrà idda lòdegangwìbasdik. Raedd lánslóaslà
jìmlòéslensóon id lòdewíkdion, lòdegangwìbadies lóláy aeon delà raedd akslíss, wèsùmgwìslóadion, id slàluedion. Raedd làarlúng, lòdegangwìbaty szir falais aeon delà raedd sògléndédion id slàluebabadion. Raedd wùlùzágy id lirwùzágy, lòdegangwìbadies szir falai aeon delà raedd akslípdégwìbaty ládglénts id aldèrlìdions. Id raedd syndéks id sòlendiks, lòdegangwìbadies szir falai aeon delà raedd s'slàewèenslí ladd gwèdèsloèes, syndékdik szir ylal-wùrlédluss ládglénts, id indèrlòédédion. Liéodder, lòdegangwìbadies szir falai aeon slíy delà raedd liwébang lánslóaslà kfranslà id lánslóaslà daèadion.
:::
A wide variety of evidence suggests that language is probabilistic. In language comprehension and production, probabilities play a role in access, disambiguation, and generalization. In learning, probability [szir] plays a role in segmentation and generalization. In phonology and morphology, probabilities [szir] play a role in acceptability judgments and alternations. And in syntax and semantics, probabilities [szir] play a role in the frequency of categories, syntactic [szir] well-formedness judgments, and interpretation. Moreover, probabilities [szir] play a key role in modeling language change and language variation.

Wès tuzàlé sysdèledigwèlat inddesdisládès s'lòdegangwìbasdik lìdìé ladd lánslóaslà sha aeon enslà ladd debwúelds ladd banslóisdiks (wùlùzágy, lirwùzágy, syndéks, sòlendiks, psykslobanslóisdiks, slisdíègwèl banfróisdiks, id sòjíobanslóisdiks) , eaksl jìddeéd ifeshi aeon slòjíabast. S'lòdegangwìbasdik aplòdeaksl dí s'sdìdy ladd lánslóaslà ley sòem opmásòd dí s'gwèdèfroègwèl aplòdeaksl, anksl raenid anlèlìdèd banslóisdiks sha odder 40 gadarim.
:::
This volume systematically investigates the probabilistic nature of language for a range of subfields of linguistics (phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, psycholinguistics, historical linguistics, and sociolinguistics), each covered by a specialist. The probabilistic approach to the study of language may seem opposed to the categorical approach, which has dominated linguistics for over 40 years.

--- END OF TEXT 92 ---
--- START OF TEXT 93 (Language in Pictland) ---

S' old-stylà zank wítyen lánkage id 'eke' zaes raz s' sleart ladd Makdis sdìwèes. Dí earzaer skslolárs, iwéndifarng s' zankisdik afwúlúdies ladd s' Makts hàeléd dí kaendèe aeon unwérsdénwèng ladd deir ekial afwúlúdies, id dus dí esdébzas s' ekial oègins ladd s' Skotdis lìdion.
:::
The old-style link between language and 'eke' lies at the heart of Pictish studies. To earlier scholars, identifying the linguistic affinities of the Picts [seemed] to [guarantee] an understanding of their ethnic affinities, and thus to establish the ethnic origins of the Scottish nation.

Y ren wíginlúng dí apperekiadè edlúkity issa aeon kuldìelat-konsterukdèd kadègory, raedd s' lóst issa raedd s' perehànt, id dí akklùwlàdge dat geludiks lued raen zattlà vaj lùding dí wi and iz, adt iz siud wí wùozas dí wény s' konlukdion wítyen lánkage id oder aslòkts ladd kuldìé. Ked s' kurént geluedion ladd skslolárs idda dénglàd sud raedd kaddeats id kazawúkadions wen déljíng aweut edlúkity, perejeous geluedions raen lùt wult sò wutdèéd. Keldik sdìwèes raen wíen lórdikulárat perolu dí kadazaer sdédèlénts aweut lánkage, bzáod, id ekial 'lòrsòlìzaty', wiksl ley lùw kauhà nizze dí láugsl vaj annke…
:::
We are beginning to appreciate ethnicity as a culturally-constructed category, in the past as in the present, and to acknowledge that genetics have had little or nothing to do with it, but it should be [foolish] to deny the connection between language and other aspects of culture. While the current [tradition] of scholars is [tangled] up in caveats and [qualifications] when talking about ethnicity, previous traditions have not felt so [fettered]. Celtic studies have been particularly prone to categorical statements about language, blood, and ethnic 'personality', which may now cause us to laugh or [wink]...

Ladd:
:::
From:

S' old-stylà bank gwítgadn lánslóaslà id 'eslí ' baes raz s'freart ladd Pikdis sdìwèes. Dí earbaer skslolárs, iwéndifarng s' banslóisdik afwúlúdies ladd s' Pikts sòeléd dí slóaendèe aeon unwérsdénwèng ladd wéir ejíal afwúlúdies, id wís dí esdébbas s'ejíal oèslens ladd s' Sjìtdis lìdion.
:::
The old-style link between language and 'race' lies at the heart of Pictish studies. To earlier scholars, identifying the linguistic affinities of the Picts seemed to guarantee an understanding of their ethnic affinities, and thus to establish the ethnic origins of the Scottish nation.

Y ren gwíslenlúng dí aplòéjíadè edlújíty issa aeon yldìelat-jìnsdèsúkdèd gwèdèslory, raedd s'lóst issa raedd s'lòésònt, id dí akklùwlàdslà yt slàludiks lued raen battlà vaj lùwèng dí an sem iz, gadt iz siud gwí wùobas dí wény s' jìnlukdion gwítgadn lánslóaslà id owér aslòkts ladd yldìé. Ked s'yrént fràluedion ladd skslolárs idda dénglàd sud raedd gwèddeats id uabawúgwèdions yn déljíng agwet edlújíty, lòéjeous slàluedions raen lùt flt sò ftdèéd. Slíldik sdìwèes raen gwíen lórdiylárat lòdelu dí gwèdabaer sdédèlénts agwet lánslóaslà, bzáod, id ejíal 'lòrsòlìbaty', anksl ley lùw gwèusò nizze dí láugsl vaj annslí …
:::
We are beginning to appreciate ethnicity as a culturally-constructed category, in the past as in the present, and to acknowledge that genetics have had little or nothing to do with it, but it should be [foolish] to deny the connection between language and other aspects of culture. While the current [tradition] of scholars is [tangled] up in caveats and [qualifications] when talking about ethnicity, previous traditions have not felt so [fettered]. Celtic studies have been particularly prone to categorical statements about language, blood, and ethnic 'personality', which may now cause us to laugh or [wink]...

--- END OF TEXT 93 ---
--- START OF TEXT 94 (Gadar 2009 Ewèdions /// Year 2009 Editions) ---

S'wùlzáanng gruks raen gwíen màbbasòd raedd wùrslotdèn id unwékyféd lánslóaslàs bzág.
Savo ladd wém ren adailáblà issa sligsl uabaty PDF wúlàs sem sligfr ésòzàdion JPG ileslàs.
:::
The following books have been published in the forgotten and [unclassified] languages [blog].
All of them are available as high quality PDF files with high resolution JPG images.

Anwnzáawèng éuest anvar gwí wèékdèd dí ayndryl@gmail.com vaj ifeshi másding aeon éuest raz raedd am fèend yb lóslà www.zineb.webs.com :
:::
Downloading requests should be directed to ayndryl@gmail.com or by posting a request at my [friend] [web] page www.zineb.webs.com :

--- END OF TEXT 94 ---
--- START OF TEXT 95 (A Grammar of Affel, a vampirical language of Southeastern Europe) ---

Teransyldalúa, and raeddiz wéep dallàys dersuunwéd ifeshi aeon kosulut ladd lòaks, raedd iz anwé wisóns and sligsllánds, malu wùésts id s' Almalu léawiws raz s' wuet ladd immásóng glákiers; and raedd iz hált lèlus aléady nrjid raedd pereslisdíry, and raedd iz gold gadeéd sónke Luozadik dilés ferom ddeins raedd raedd iz sukks id ferom s' ydèrs ladd raedd iz stereams; and raedd iz éferesing, akiwèk, anlu-zaji, lìdìelat karwelìdèd sperings, Teransyldalúa, aeon slell aéa raedd s' láp ladd s' Easdèrn id Sòudern Karlódians, aeon kountery fudd s' easdèrnlist edge ladd Kenteral Eusulò.
:::
Transylvania, with in its deep valleys surrounded by a [coronet] of [peaks], in its wide [basins] with highlands, pine forests with the Almalu [meadows] at the foot of imposing glaciers; with in it heart [malt] already [worked] in prehistory, and in its gold gathered since Luozadik times from veins in its rocks with from the waters of its streams; with in its refreshing, [acidic], [done-like], naturally [carbonated] springs, Transylvania, a small area in the gap of the Eastern with Southern Carpathians, a country on the easternmost edge of Central Europe.

Edden dougsl iz ys apperoaksled earat ifeshi Easdèrn Ordowiksy elelìding ferom Bybandium, raedd iz Kslèsdialúty idda wisókalat ysdèrn. Ilúdialat s' Sulen èdìal ys perewilèlìnt wét ládèr iz wíkalé s' wisdion ladd Eusulòan Perodèsdéndism.
:::
Even though it is approached early by Eastern Orthodoxy leading from Byzantium, its Christianity is basically western. Initially the Roman ritual was prevalent but later it became the [bastion] of European Protestantism.

--- END OF TEXT 95 ---
--- START OF TEXT 96 (S' Gwara lánslóaslà ladd Nigeria /// The Gwara language of Nigeria) ---

Fsum s' lomwír id sóze ladd hàttlàlénts, iz idda zajiat dat deqé ren làss dan 3000 slòajirs and sòlé klùwlàdge ladd Gyqe. Kslilderen sdill raen raz làast aeon lóssódde klùwlàdge ladd s' Gyqe lánslóaslà, wét iz idda wéwúlúdèat dhéadèlud id akdidde klùwlàdge idda wèháplòaqèng. Tsleshé ren perowibat onat aeon wuw slundered teruat komlòdènt slòajirs, aldougsl indèrddendions ifeshi sksloolkslilderen wíshèng s' ezakidédion hàssóons hóggesdèd dat s' jeews ladd awílts ley wí dío lòssólèsdik. Hauhá idda s' wilèlìnt lánslóaslà ladd indèrkomlílúkadion id idda ofdèn speread ifeshi awílts wo raen nrjid outsówé raedd s' sódies.
:::
From the number and size of settlements, it is judged that there are less than 3000 speakers with some knowledge of Gwara. Children still have at least a passive knowledge of the Gwara language, but it is definitely threatened and active knowledge is disappearing. There are probably only a few hundred true competent speakers, although interviews by schoolchildren visiting the examination sessions suggested that the views of adults may be too pessimistic. Hausa is the dominant language of intercommunication and is often spread by adults who have worked outside in the cities.

Lánslóaslà elley smájin ifeshi leny olwér lòoplà inkzàwé Iwí, Ase id Hshim. Nearby lánguages inkzàwé Grung id Hshim, wét iz aplòars dehà ren lùt anwéat smájin ifeshi Gyqe. Iwí raedd lórdikulár ley wí aeon immárdént sòurke ladd záannrds raedd Gyqe.
:::
Language also spoken by many other people include Iwi, Ase and Hshim. Nearby languages include Grung and Hshim, but it appears they are not widely spoken by Gwara. Iwi in particular may be an important source of loanwords in Gwara.

--- END OF TEXT 96 ---
--- START OF TEXT 97 (Yeddim ruenza's effa yaddim shaiddeths effa Thkelemsinh) ---

Y raen wéjíwéd dí ilúdiadè aeon andeugsl alìatsós ladd Yeddim ruenza's effa yaddim shaiddeths effa Thkelemsinh. Y sid sdért másding s'wèffént délàs fdem wès nnwérslal id mysdèèous gruk, yètdèn raedd affbaan lánslóaslà .
:::
We have decided to initiate a thorough analysis of Yeddim ruenza's effa yaddim shaiddeths effa Thkelemsinh. We will start posting the different tales from this wonderful and mysterious book, written in affbaan language.

Ked ruu fel ud gwèn lòdejewé dèensládions ladd iz, gwí iz inwèjewíal nrds vaj lást jìmplàdè lóssùslàs, plàasò an!
:::
If you feel you can provide translations of it, whether it be individual words or just complete passages, please do!

Iz idda aeon 150 lóslàs gruk sem ilzàsdèedions raedd PDF wùrlet.
:::
It is a 150-page book with illustrations in PDF format.

--- END OF TEXT 97 ---
--- START OF TEXT 98 () ---

